ITEM 8 | Financial Statements and Supplementary Data\nAmerican International Group, Inc.\nReference to Financial Statements and Schedules\n170 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm\nReport of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm\nTo the Board of Directors and Shareholders of American International Group, Inc.:\nOpinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting\nWe have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of American International Group, Inc. and its subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2018 and 2017, and the related consolidated statements of income, comprehensive income (loss), equity, and cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2018, including the related notes and financial statement schedules listed in the accompanying index (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited the Company\'s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2018, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).\nIn our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2018 and 2017, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2018 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2018, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.\nBasis for Opinions\nThe Company\'s management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting appearing under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company\'s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.\nWe conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.\nOur audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.\nAs described in Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting, management has excluded Validus Holdings, Ltd. and Glatfelter Insurance Group (the “Acquired Businesses”) from its assessment of internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2018 because they were acquired by the Company in purchase business combinations during 2018. We have also excluded the Acquired Businesses from our audit of internal control over financial reporting. The Acquired Businesses are wholly-owned subsidiaries whose total assets and total revenues excluded from management’s assessment and our audit of internal control over financial reporting collectively represent approximately 2 percent and 3 percent, respectively, of the related consolidated financial statement amounts as of and for the year ended December 31, 2018.\nDefinition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting\nA company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.\nBecause of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.\n/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP\nNew York, New York\nFebruary 15, 2019\nWe have served as the Company’s auditor since 1980.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 171\nAmerican International Group, Inc.\nConsolidated Balance Sheets\n172 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nAmerican International Group, Inc.\nConsolidated Statements of Income\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 173\nAmerican International Group, Inc.\nConsolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)\n174 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nAmerican International Group, Inc.\nConsolidated Statements of Equity\nSee accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 175\nAmerican International Group, Inc.\nConsolidated Statements of Cash Flows\n176 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nAmerican International Group, Inc.\nConsolidated Statements of Cash Flows (continued)\n* Includes funds held for tax sharing payments to AIG Parent, security deposits, replacement reserve deposits related to our affordable housing investments, and security deposits for certain leased aircraft and escrow funds related to our investment in Castle Holdings LLC’s aircraft assets, which was sold in 2018.\nSee accompanying Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 177\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 1. Basis of Presentation\n1. Basis of Presentation\nAmerican International Group, Inc. (AIG) is a leading global insurance organization serving customers in more than 80 countries and jurisdictions. AIG companies serve commercial and individual customers through one of the most extensive worldwide property-casualty networks of any insurer. In addition, AIG companies are leading providers of life insurance and retirement services in the United States. AIG Common Stock, par value $2.50 per share (AIG Common Stock), is listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE: AIG). On December 3, 2018, AIG’s Common Stock was voluntarily delisted from the Tokyo Stock Exchange. Unless the context indicates otherwise, the terms “AIG,” “we,” “us” or “our” mean American International Group, Inc. and its consolidated subsidiaries and the term “AIG Parent” means American International Group, Inc. and not any of its consolidated subsidiaries.\nThe consolidated financial statements include the accounts of AIG Parent, our controlled subsidiaries (generally through a greater than 50 percent ownership of voting rights and voting interests), and variable interest entities (VIEs) of which we are the primary beneficiary. Equity investments in entities that we do not consolidate, including corporate entities in which we have significant influence and partnership and partnership-like entities in which we have more than minor influence over the operating and financial policies, are accounted for under the equity method unless we have elected the fair value option.\nCertain of our foreign subsidiaries included in the Consolidated Financial Statements report on fiscal-period ending November 30. The effect on our consolidated financial condition and results of operations of all material events occurring at these subsidiaries through the date of each of the periods presented in these Consolidated Financial Statements has been considered for adjustment and/or disclosure.\nThe accompanying consolidated financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). All material intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated.\nAcquisition of Businesses\nValidus\nOn July 18, 2018, we completed the purchase of Validus Holdings, Ltd. (Validus), a leading provider of reinsurance, primary insurance, and asset management services, for $5.5 billion in cash. The results of Validus following the date of the acquisition are included in our General Insurance segment starting in the third quarter of 2018. Our North America results include the results of Validus Reinsurance, Ltd. and Western World Insurance Group, Inc., while our International results include the results of Talbot Holdings Ltd.\nFor additional information relating to the acquisition of Validus, see Note 4.\nGlatfelter\nOn November 6, 2018 AIG completed the purchase of Glatfelter Insurance Group, a full-service broker and insurance company providing services for specialty programs and retail operations.\nEllipse\nOn December 31, 2018, AIG Life Ltd., a U.K. AIG Life and Retirement company, completed the acquisition of Ellipse, a specialist provider of group life risk protection in the U.K.\nSales of Businesses\nSale of Certain Insurance Subsidiary Operations to Fairfax\nOn October 18, 2016, we entered into an agreement to sell certain insurance operations to Fairfax Financial Holdings Limited (Fairfax). The agreement included the sale of our subsidiary operations in Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Uruguay, Venezuela and Turkey. Fairfax acquired renewal rights for the portfolios of local business written by our operations in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Slovakia, and assume certain of our operating assets and employees. Substantially all of the operations and renewal rights that we agreed to sell to Fairfax were sold by December 31, 2017.\n178 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 1. Basis of Presentation\nAIG Fuji Life Insurance\nOn November 14, 2016, we entered into an agreement to sell Fuji Life to FWD Group, the insurance arm of Pacific Century Group. Total cash consideration to us was approximately $333 million. The transaction closed on April 30, 2017.\nUnited Guaranty\nOn December 31, 2016, we sold our 100 percent interest in United Guaranty Corporation (United Guaranty) and certain related affiliates to Arch Capital Group Ltd. (Arch) for total consideration of $3.3 billion, consisting of $2.2 billion of cash and approximately $1.1 billion of newly issued Arch convertible non-voting common-equivalent preferred stock and reported a pre-tax gain of approximately $697 million. We also received $261 million in pre-closing dividends from United Guaranty in the fourth quarter of 2016. However, due to pending regulatory approvals, United Guaranty Asia was not included in the December 31, 2016 closing and $40 million of cash consideration was retained by Arch. The sale of United Guaranty Asia was completed on July 1, 2017 and we received the $40 million cash proceeds. In the first quarter of 2018, we sold our remaining interest in Arch, which we received as part of the consideration for selling United Guaranty to Arch in 2016.\nConcurrent with the closing, we entered into reinsurance agreements with Arch, including an amended and restated 50 percent quota share reinsurance agreement and an aggregate excess of loss reinsurance agreement, pursuant to which we will continue to be exposed to certain United Guaranty policies written between 2009 and 2016.\nAscot\nOn September 16, 2016, we entered into an agreement to sell our 20 percent interest in Ascot Underwriting Holdings Ltd. and our 100 percent interest in the related syndicate-funding subsidiary Ascot Corporate Name Ltd. to Canada Pension Plan Investment Board (CPPIB). Total consideration for the transaction was $1.1 billion resulting in a pre-tax gain of approximately $162 million attributable to AIG’s controlling interest, inclusive of CPPIB’s recapitalization of Syndicate 1414’s Funds at Lloyd’s (FAL) capital requirements. The transaction closed on November 18, 2016, and we received approximately $244 million in net cash proceeds.\nKorea Fund\nOn November 17, 2016, an AIG sponsored Fund (the Korea Fund), completed the sale of mixed-use commercial complex in Seoul, South Korea commonly known as the Seoul International Finance Center to Brookfield Properties for a total consideration of $2.5 billion, of which $1.2 billion was used to repay the fund’s debt. The sale resulted in a pre-tax gain ☐ f $1.1 billi ☐ n included in Other Income, of which $464 million was attributable to AIG’s controlling interest.\nNSM\nOn August 31, 2016, we sold our controlling interest in NSM Insurance Group LLC (NSM), a managing general agent to ABRY Partners, a private equity firm, for consideration of $201 million resulting in a pre-tax gain of approximately $105 million in the third quarter of 2016. We retained an equity interest in a newly formed joint venture, which we subsequently sold on May 11, 2018 to White Mountains Catskill Holdings, Inc. We will continue to provide underwriting capacity to NSM.\nNon-controlling interest in Fortitude\nOn November 13, 2018, we completed the sale of a 19.9 percent ownership interest in Fortitude Holdings to TCG, an affiliate of The Carlyle Group L.P. (Carlyle). Fortitude Holdings owns 100 percent of the outstanding common shares of Fortitude Re and AIG has an 80.1 percent ownership interest in Fortitude Holdings. We received $381 million in cash and will receive up to $95 million of deferred compensation which is subject to certain purchase price adjustments. To the extent we do not receive all or a portion of the planned distributions within 18 months of the Fortitude Re Closing, TCG will pay us up to an additional $100 million. In connection with the sale, we agreed to certain investment commitment targets into various Carlyle strategies and to certain minimum investment management fee payments within thirty-six months following the closing. We also will be required to pay a proportionate amount of an agreed make-whole fee to the extent we fail to satisfy such investment commitment targets.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 179\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 1. Basis of Presentation\nUse of Estimates\nThe preparation of financial statements in accordance with GAAP requires the application of accounting policies that often involve a significant degree of judgment. Accounting policies that we believe are most dependent on the application of estimates and assumptions are considered our critical accounting estimates and are related to the determination of:\n• liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses (loss reserves);\n• reinsurance assets;\n• valuation of future policy benefit liabilities and timing and extent of loss recognition;\n• valuation of liabilities for guaranteed benefit features of variable annuity products;\n• valuation of embedded derivatives for fixed index annuity and life products;\n• estimated gross profits to value deferred policy acquisition costs for investment-oriented products;\n• impairment charges, including other-than-temporary impairments on available for sale securities, impairments on other invested assets, including investments in life settlements, and goodwill impairment;\n• allowances for loan losses;\n• liability for legal contingencies;\n• fair value measurements of certain financial assets and liabilities; and\n• income tax assets and liabilities, including recoverability of our net deferred tax asset and the predictability of future tax operating profitability of the character necessary to realize the net deferred tax asset and estimates associated with the Tax Act.\nThese accounting estimates require the use of assumptions about matters, some of which are highly uncertain at the time of estimation. To the extent actual experience differs from the assumptions used, our consolidated financial condition, results of operations and cash flows could be materially affected.\nOut of Period Adjustments\nFor the year ended December 31, 2018, our results include out of period adjustments relating to prior periods that decreased net income attributable to AIG by $77 million, and decreased Income from continuing operations before income taxes by $98 million. The out of period adjustments are primarily related to decreases in deferred policy acquisition costs and increases in policyholder contract deposits. We determined that these adjustments were not material to the current year or to any previously reported annual financial statements. Had these adjustments been recorded in their appropriate periods, Net income attributable to AIG for the years ended December 31, 2017, and December 31, 2016 would have increased by $95 million, and by $117 million, respectively.\nFor the year ended December 31, 2016, we recorded out of period adjustments relating to prior years that increased Net loss attributable to AIG by $174 million and increased Loss from continuing operations before income taxes by $57 million. The out of period adjustments are primarily related to income tax liabilities and ceded loss adjustment expenses.\n180 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies\n2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies\nThe following table identifies our significant accounting policies presented in other Notes to these Consolidated Financial Statements, with a reference to the Note where a detailed description can be found:\nNote 6. Investments\n• Fixed maturity and equity securities\n• Other invested assets\n• Short-term investments\n• Net investment income\n• Net realized capital gains (losses)\n• Other-than-temporary impairments\nNote 7. Lending Activities\n• Mortgage and other loans receivable - net of allowance\nNote 8. Reinsurance\n• Reinsurance assets - net of allowance\n• Retroactive reinsurance\nNote 9. Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs\n• Deferred policy acquisition costs\n• Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs\nNote 10. Variable Interest Entities\nNote 11. Derivatives and Hedge Accounting\n• Derivative assets and liabilities, at fair value\nNote 12. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets\nNote 13. Insurance Liabilities\n• Liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses\n• Discounting of reserves\n• Future policy benefits\n• Policyholder contract deposits\n• Other policyholder funds\nNote 14. Variable Life and Annuity Contracts\nNote 15. Debt\n• Long-term debt\nNote 16. Contingencies, Commitments and Guarantees\n• Legal contingencies\nNote 18. Earnings Per Share\nNote 23. Income Taxes\nOther significant accounting policies\nPremiums for short-duration contracts are recorded as written on the inception date of the policy. Premiums are earned primarily on a pro rata basis over the term of the related coverage. Sales of extended services contracts are reflected as premiums written and earned on a pro rata basis over the term of the related coverage. In addition, certain miscellaneous income is included as premiums written and earned. The reserve for unearned premiums includes the portion of premiums written relating to the unexpired terms of coverage. Reinsurance premiums are typically earned over the same period as the underlying policies or risks covered by the contract. As a result, the earnings pattern of a reinsurance contract may extend up to 24 months, reflecting the inception dates of the underlying policies throughout the year.\nReinsurance premiums ceded under prospective reinsurance agreements are recognized as a reduction in revenues over the period the reinsurance coverage is provided in proportion to the risks to which the premiums relate.\nReinsurance premiums for assumed business are estimated based on information received from brokers, ceding companies and reinsureds. Any subsequent differences that arise regarding such estimates are recorded in the periods in which they are determined.\nPremiums for long-duration insurance products and life contingent annuities are recognized as revenues when due. Estimates for premiums due but not yet collected are accrued.\nPolicy fees represent fees recognized from universal life and investment-type products consisting of policy charges for the cost of insurance, policy administration charges, surrender charges and amortization of unearned revenue reserves. Policy fees are recognized as revenues in the period in which they are assessed against policyholders, unless the fees are designed to compensate AIG for services to be provided in the future. Fees deferred as unearned revenue are amortized in relation to the incidence of expected gross profits to be realized over the estimated lives of the contracts, similar to DAC.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 181\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies\nOther income includes advisory fee income from the Life and Retirement broker dealer business, as well as legal recoveries of $11 million, $27 million and $44 million from legacy crisis and other matters in 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.\nOther income from our Other Operations category consists of the following:\n· Changes in fair value relating to financial assets and liabilities for which the fair value option has been elected.\n· Interest income and related expenses, including amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts on bonds with changes in the timing and the amount of expected principal and interest cash flows reflected in the yield, as applicable.\n· Dividend income from common and preferred stock and earnings distributions from other investments.\n· Changes in the fair value of other securities sold but not yet purchased, futures, hybrid financial instruments, securities purchased under agreements to resell, and securities sold under agreements to repurchase.\n· Income earned on real estate based investments and related realized gains and losses from sales, property level impairments and financing costs.\n· Exchange gains and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions.\n· Earnings from private equity funds and hedge fund investments accounted for under the equity method.\n· Changes in the fair value of derivatives at AIG Financial Products Corp. and related subsidiaries (collectively AIGFP).\nCash represents cash on hand and non-interest-bearing demand deposits.\nShort-term investments consist of interest-bearing cash equivalents, time deposits, securities purchased under agreements to resell, and investments, such as commercial paper, with original maturities within one year from the date of purchase.\nPremiums and other receivables - net of allowance include premium balances receivable, amounts due from agents and brokers and policyholders, trade receivables for the Direct Investment book (DIB) and Global Capital Markets (GCM) and other receivables. Trade receivables for GCM include cash collateral posted to derivative counterparties that is not eligible to be netted against derivative liabilities. The allowance for doubtful accounts on premiums and other receivables was $216 million and $236 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nOther assets consist of sales inducement assets, prepaid expenses, deposits, other deferred charges, real estate, other fixed assets, capitalized software costs, goodwill, intangible assets other than goodwill, restricted cash and derivative assets.\nWe offer sales inducements which include enhanced crediting rates or bonus payments to contract holders (bonus interest) on certain annuity and investment contract products. Sales inducements provided to the contract holder are recognized in Policyholder contract deposits in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Such amounts are deferred and amortized over the life of the contract using the same methodology and assumptions used to amortize DAC (see Note 9 herein). To qualify for such accounting treatment, the bonus interest must be explicitly identified in the contract at inception. We must also demonstrate that such amounts are incremental to amounts we credit on similar contracts without bonus interest, and are higher than the contract’s expected ongoing crediting rates for periods after the bonus period. The deferred bonus interest and other deferred sales inducement assets totaled $752 million and $738 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The amortization expense associated with these assets is reported within Interest credited to policyholder account balances in the Consolidated Statements of Income. Such amortization expense totaled $156 million, $94 million and $77 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.\nThe cost of buildings and furniture and equipment is depreciated principally on the straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives (maximum of 40 years for buildings and 10 years for furniture and equipment). Expenditures for maintenance and repairs are charged to income as incurred and expenditures for improvements are capitalized and depreciated. We periodically assess the carrying amount of our real estate for purposes of determining any asset impairment. Capitalized software costs, which represent costs directly related to obtaining, developing or upgrading internal use software, are capitalized and amortized using the straight-line method over a period generally not exceeding five years.\nSeparate accounts represent funds for which investment income and investment gains and losses accrue directly to the policyholders who bear the investment risk. Each account has specific investment objectives and the assets are carried at fair value. The assets of each account are legally segregated and are not subject to claims that arise from any of our other businesses. The liabilities for these accounts are equal to the account assets. Separate accounts may also include deposits for funds held under stable value wrap funding agreements, although the majority of stable value wrap sales are measured based on the notional amount included in assets under management and do not include the receipt of funds. For a more detailed discussion of separate accounts see Note 14 herein.\n182 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies\nOther liabilities consist of other funds on deposit, other payables, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, securities sold but not yet purchased, derivative liabilities and deferred gains on retroactive reinsurance agreements. We have entered into certain insurance and reinsurance contracts, primarily in our General Insurance companies, that do not contain sufficient insurance risk to be accounted for as insurance or reinsurance. Accordingly, the premiums received on such contracts, after deduction for certain related expenses, are recorded as deposits within Other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Net proceeds of these deposits are invested and generate Net investment income. As amounts are paid, consistent with the underlying contracts, the deposit liability is reduced. Also included in Other liabilities are trade payables for the DIB and GCM, which include option premiums received and payables to counterparties that relate to unrealized gains and losses on futures, forwards, and options and balances due to clearing brokers and exchanges. Trade payables for GCM also include cash collateral received from derivative counterparties that contractually cannot be netted against derivative assets.\nSecurities sold but not yet purchased represent sales of securities not owned at the time of sale. The obligations arising from such transactions are recorded on a trade-date basis and carried at fair value. Fair values of securities sold but not yet purchased are based on current market prices.\nForeign currency: Financial statement accounts expressed in foreign currencies are translated into U.S. dollars. Functional currency assets and liabilities are translated into U.S. dollars generally using rates of exchange prevailing at the balance sheet date of each respective subsidiary and the related translation adjustments are recorded as a separate component of Accumulated other comprehensive income, net of any related taxes, in Total AIG shareholders’ equity. Income statement accounts expressed in functional currencies are translated using average exchange rates during the period. Functional currencies are generally the currencies of the local operating environment. Financial statement accounts expressed in currencies other than the functional currency of a consolidated entity are remeasured into that entity’s functional currency resulting in exchange gains or losses recorded in income. The adjustments resulting from translation of financial statements of foreign entities operating in highly inflationary economies are recorded in income.\nNon-redeemable noncontrolling interest is the portion of equity (net assets) in a subsidiary not attributable, directly or indirectly, to a parent.\nAccounting Standards Adopted During 2018\nRevenue Recognition\nIn May 2014, the FASB issued an accounting standard that supersedes most existing revenue recognition guidance. The standard excludes from its scope the accounting for insurance contracts, leases, financial instruments, and certain other agreements that are governed under other GAAP guidance, but could affect the revenue recognition for certain of our other activities.\nWe adopted the standard using the modified retrospective approach on its required effective date of January 1, 2018. Our analysis of revenues indicated that substantially all of our revenues were from sources excluded from the scope of the standard. For those revenue sources within the scope of the standard, there were no material changes in the timing or measurement of revenues based upon the guidance. As substantially all of our revenue sources were excluded from the scope of the standard, the adoption of the standard did not have a material impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or required disclosures.\nRecognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities\nIn January 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard that requires equity investments that do not follow the equity method of accounting or are not subject to consolidation to be measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in earnings, while financial liabilities for which fair value option accounting has been elected, changes in fair value due to instrument-specific credit risk are presented separately in other comprehensive income. The standard allows the election to record equity investments without readily determinable fair values at cost, less impairment, adjusted for subsequent observable price changes with changes in the carrying value of the equity investments recorded in earnings. The standard also updates certain fair value disclosure requirements for financial instruments carried at amortized cost.\nWe adopted the standard on its effective date of January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective approach. The impact of the adoption is primarily related to the reclassification of unrealized gains of equity securities resulting in a net decrease to beginning Accumulated other comprehensive income and a corresponding net increase to beginning Retained earnings of $824 million.\nClassification of Certain Cash Receipts and Cash Payments\nIn August 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard that addresses diversity in how certain cash receipts and cash payments are presented and classified in the statement of cash flows. The amendments provide clarity on the treatment of eight specifically defined types of cash inflows and outflows.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 183\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies\nWe adopted the standard retrospectively on its effective date of January 1, 2018. The standard addresses presentation in the statement of cash flows only and did not have a material impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations or required disclosures.\nIntra-Entity Transfers of Assets Other than Inventory\nIn October 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard that requires an entity to recognize the income tax consequences of an intra-entity transfer of an asset other than inventory when the transfer occurs, rather than when the asset is sold to a third party.\nWe adopted the standard on its effective date of January 1, 2018 using a modified retrospective approach. The adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or required disclosures.\nRestricted Cash\nIn November 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard that provides guidance on the presentation of restricted cash in the Statement of Cash Flows. Entities are required to explain the changes during a reporting period in the total of cash, cash equivalents, and amounts generally described as restricted cash or restricted cash equivalents in the statement of cash flows.\nWe adopted the standard retrospectively on its effective date of January 1, 2018. The standard addresses presentation of restricted cash in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows only and had no impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations or required disclosures.\nGains and Losses from the Derecognition of Nonfinancial Assets\nIn February 2017, the FASB issued an accounting standard that clarifies the scope of the derecognition guidance for the sale, transfer and derecognition of non-financial assets to noncustomers that aligns with the new revenue recognition principles. The standard also adds new accounting for partial sales of nonfinancial assets (including real estate) that requires an entity to derecognize a nonfinancial asset when it 1) ceases to have a controlling financial interest in the legal entity that holds the asset based on the consolidation model and 2) transfers control of the asset based on the revenue recognition model.\nWe adopted this standard on its effective date of January 1, 2018 using the modified retrospective approach. Based on our evaluation, the adoption of this standard did not have a material impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or required disclosures.\nImproving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension and Postretirement Benefit Cost\nIn March 2017, the FASB issued an accounting standard that requires entities to report the service cost component of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit costs in the same line item as other compensation costs arising from services rendered by the pertinent employees during the period. The other components of net periodic benefit costs are required to be separately presented in the income statement. The amendments also allow only the service cost component to be eligible for capitalization when applicable.\nWe adopted this standard on its effective date of January 1, 2018. The standard primarily addresses the presentation of the service cost component of net periodic benefit costs in the income statement. AIG’s U.S. pension plans are frozen and no longer accrue benefits, which are reflected as service costs. Therefore, the standard did not have a material impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or required disclosures.\nModification of Share-Based Payment Awards\nIn May 2017, the FASB issued an accounting standard that provides guidance about which changes to the terms or conditions of a share-based payment award require an entity to apply modification accounting.\nWe prospectively adopted this standard on its effective date of January 1, 2018 and the standard did not have a material impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or required disclosures.\nReclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income\nIn February 2018, the FASB issued an accounting standard that allows the optional reclassification of stranded tax effects within accumulated other comprehensive income to retained earnings that arise due to the enactment of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 (Tax Act). The amount of the reclassification would reflect the impact of the change in the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate on the gross deferred tax amounts and related valuation allowances, if any, at the date of enactment of the Tax Act and other income tax effects of the Tax Act on items remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income.\n184 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies\nWe adopted the standard effective January 1, 2018. The impact of the adoption of the standard resulted in an increase to beginning Accumulated other comprehensive income and a corresponding decrease to beginning Retained earnings of $248 million. For more information on the adoption of the Tax Act, see Note 23.\nFuture Application of Accounting Standards\nLeases\nIn February 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard that will require lessees with lease terms of more than 12 months to recognize a right of use asset and a corresponding lease liability on their balance sheets. For income statement purposes, the FASB retained a dual model, requiring leases to be classified as either operating leases or finance leases. Lessor accounting remained largely the same, with the exception of certain specified changes. The standard is effective for annual periods beginning after December 15, 2018, and interim periods within those years, using a modified retrospective approach, and provides for certain practical expedients in transition. During 2018, the FASB issued several amendments and targeted improvements to ease with the application of the standard, including the addition of a transition approach that gives the Company the option of applying the standard at either the beginning of the earliest comparative period presented or the beginning of the period of adoption.\nWe plan to adopt the standard on its effective date of January 1, 2019, by recognizing a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings for leases existing at the date of adoption. We will also elect certain practical expedients that allow us not to reassess existing leases under the new guidance. Based on our analysis, the vast majority of the Company’s lease obligation pertained to real estate utilized in the operation of our businesses. Consequently, the primary impact of adoption will result in the recognition of a right of use asset and a lease liability for operating leases pertaining to our real estate portfolio that are expected to represent less than one percent of the Company’s Total Assets and Total Liabilities, respectively. We do not expect the standard to have a material effect on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or required disclosures. See Note 16, Contingencies, Commitments and Guarantees for additional information.\nFinancial Instruments - Credit Losses\nIn June 2016, the FASB issued an accounting standard that will change how entities account for credit losses for most financial assets, trade receivables and reinsurance receivables. The standard will replace the existing incurred loss impairment model with a new “current expected credit loss model” that generally will result in earlier recognition of credit losses. The standard will apply to financial assets subject to credit losses, including loans measured at amortized cost, reinsurance receivables and certain off-balance sheet credit exposures. Additionally, the impairment of available-for-sale debt securities, including purchased credit deteriorated securities, are subject to the new guidance and will be measured in a similar manner, except that losses will be recognized as allowances rather than reductions in the amortized cost of the securities. The standard will also require additional information to be disclosed in the footnotes.\nWe plan to adopt the standard on its effective date of January 1, 2020. We are continuing to develop our implementation plan to adopt the standard and are assessing the impact of the standard on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and required disclosures. While we expect an increase in our allowances for credit losses for the financial instruments within scope of the standard, given the objective of the new standard, the amount of any change will be dependent on our portfolios’ composition and quality at the adoption date as well as economic conditions and forecasts at that time.\nSimplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment\nIn January 2017, the FASB issued an accounting standard that eliminates the requirement to calculate the implied fair value of goodwill, through a hypothetical purchase price allocation, to measure a goodwill impairment charge. Instead, entities will record an impairment charge based on the excess of a reporting unit’s carrying amount over its fair value not to exceed the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit. An entity should also consider income tax effects from tax deductible goodwill on the carrying amount of the reporting unit when measuring the goodwill impairment loss, if applicable.\nThe standard is effective on January 1, 2020, with early adoption permitted. We are evaluating the timing of our adoption. Any impact of the standard will be dependent on the market conditions of the reporting units at the time of adoption.\nPremium Amortization on Purchased Callable Debt Securities\nIn March 2017, the FASB issued an accounting standard that shortens the amortization period for certain callable debt securities held at a premium by requiring the premium to be amortized to the earliest call date. The standard does not require an accounting change for securities held at a discount, which continue to be amortized to maturity.\nWe plan to adopt the standard retrospectively on its effective date of January 1, 2019. We do not expect the standard to have a material impact on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows or required disclosures.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 185\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 2. Summary of Significant Accounting Policies\nDerivatives and Hedging\nIn August 2017, the FASB issued an accounting standard that improves and expands hedge accounting for both financial and commodity risks. The provisions of the amendment are intended to better align the accounting with an entity’s risk management activities, enhance the transparency on how the economic results are presented in the financial statements and the footnote, and simplify the application of hedge accounting treatment.\nThe standard is effective on January 1, 2019, with early adoption permitted. We will adopt the standard on its effective date. The standard’s impact is not material to our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and required disclosures.\nTargeted Improvements to the Accounting for Long-Duration Contracts\nIn August 2018, the FASB issued an accounting standard update with the objective of making targeted improvements to the existing recognition, measurement, presentation, and disclosure requirements for long-duration contracts issued by an insurance entity. The standard prescribes significant and comprehensive changes to recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure as summarized below:\n• Requires the review and if necessary update of future policy benefit assumptions at least annually for traditional and limited pay long duration contracts, with the recognition and separate presentation of any resulting re-measurement gain or loss (except for discount rate changes as noted below) in the income statement.\n• Requires the discount rate assumption to be updated at the end of each reporting period using an upper medium grade (low-credit risk) fixed income instrument yield that maximizes the use of observable market inputs and recognizes the impact of changes to discount rates in other comprehensive income.\n• Simplifies the amortization of deferred acquisition costs (DAC) to a constant level basis over the expected term of the related contracts with adjustments for unexpected terminations, but no longer requires an impairment test.\n• Requires the measurement of all market risk benefits associated with deposit (or account balance) contracts at fair value through the income statement with the exception of instrument-specific credit risk changes, which will be recognized in other comprehensive income.\n• Increased disclosures of disaggregated roll-forwards of policy benefits, account balances, market risk benefits, separate account liabilities and information about significant inputs, judgments and methods used in measurement and changes thereto and impact of those changes.\nWe plan to adopt the standard on its effective date of January 1, 2021. We are evaluating the method of adoption and impact of the standard on our reported consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and required disclosures. The adoption of this standard is expected to have a significant impact on our consolidated financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and required disclosures, as well as systems, processes and controls.\n186 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 3. Segment Information\n3. Segment Information\nWe report our results of operations consistent with the manner in which our chief operating decision makers review the business to assess performance and allocate resources, as follows:\nGeneral Insurance\nGeneral Insurance business is presented as two operating segments:\n· North America - consists of insurance businesses in the United States, Canada and Bermuda. This also includes the results of Validus Reinsurance, Ltd. and Western World Insurance Group, Inc. as of the acquisition date.\n· International - consists of insurance businesses in Japan, the United Kingdom, Europe, Asia Pacific, Latin America, Puerto Rico, Australia, the Middle East and Africa. This also includes the results of Talbot Holdings, Ltd. as of the acquisition date.\nResults are presented before internal reinsurance transactions. North America and International operating segments consist of the following products:\n- Commercial Lines - consists of Liability, Financial Lines, Property and Special Risks.\n- Personal Insurance - consists of Personal Lines and Accident and Health.\nLife and Retirement\nLife and Retirement business is presented as four operating segments:\n· Individual Retirement - consists of fixed annuities, fixed index annuities, variable annuities and retail mutual funds.\n· Group Retirement - consists of group mutual funds, group fixed annuities, group variable annuities, individual annuity and investment products, financial planning and advisory services.\n· Life Insurance - primary products in the U.S. include term life and universal life insurance. International operations include distribution of life and health products in the UK and Ireland.\n· Institutional Markets - consists of stable value wrap products, structured settlement and pension risk transfer annuities, corporate- and bank-owned life insurance and guaranteed investment contracts (GICs).\nOther Operations\nOther Operations category consists of:\n· Income from assets held by AIG Parent and other corporate subsidiaries.\n· General operating expenses not attributable to specific reporting segments.\n· Interest expense.\n· Blackboard - a subsidiary focused on delivering commercial insurance solutions using digital technology, data analytics and automation.\n· United Guaranty - Mortgage insurance protects mortgage lenders and investors against the increased risk of borrower default related to high loan-to-value mortgages. The sale of this business was completed on December 31, 2016.\n· Fuji Life - consists of term insurance, life insurance, endowment policies and annuities. The sale of this business was completed on April 30, 2017.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 187\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 3. Segment Information\nLegacy Portfolio\nLegacy Portfolio represents exited or discontinued product lines, policy forms or distribution channels. Effective February 2018, our Bermuda domiciled composite reinsurer, Fortitude Reinsurance Company Ltd. (Fortitude Re), formerly known as DSA Reinsurance Company, Ltd., is included in our Legacy Portfolio.\n· Legacy Life and Retirement Run-Off Lines - Reserves consist of certain structured settlements, pension risk transfer annuities and single premium immediate annuities written prior to April 2012. Also includes exposures to whole life, long-term care and exited accident & health product lines.\n· Legacy General Insurance Run-Off Lines - Reserves consist of excess workers’ compensation, environmental exposures and exposures to other products within General Insurance that are no longer actively marketed. Also includes the remaining reserves in Eaglestone Reinsurance Company (Eaglestone).\n· Legacy Investments - Includes investment classes that we have placed into run-off including holdings in direct investments as well as investments in global capital markets and global real estate.\nOn December 31, 2016, we completed the sale of United Guaranty to Arch. See Note 1 for a further discussion.\nIn the second quarter of 2015, a United Guaranty subsidiary and certain of our General Insurance companies entered into a 50 percent quota share reinsurance agreement whereby the United Guaranty subsidiary (1) ceded 50 percent of the risk relating to policies written in 2014 that were current as of January 1, 2015 and (2) ceded 50 percent of the risk relating to all policies written in 2015 and 2016, each in exchange for a 30 percent ceding commission and reimbursements of 50 percent of the losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred on covered policies. Beginning in the third quarter of 2016, the effect of this intercompany reinsurance arrangements is included in the results of Property and Special Risks and Other Operations for all periods presented. Previously, this arrangement was eliminated for purposes of segment reporting. Concurrent with the closing of the sale of United Guaranty, we amended and restated this arrangement and expect the results of this arrangement to continue to be reported in Property and Special Risks.\nInvestment income of the General Insurance companies is attributed to the North America and International operating segments based on an internal investment income allocation model. The model estimates investable funds based primarily on loss reserves and unearned premiums. Investment income of the Life and Retirement companies is attributed to the Individual Retirement, Group Retirement, Life Insurance and Institutional Markets operating segments as well as the Legacy Life and Retirement Run-Off Lines based on invested assets in segregated product line portfolios; income from invested assets in excess of liabilities is allocated to product lines based on internal capital estimates.\nWe evaluate segment performance based on adjusted revenues and adjusted pre-tax income (loss). Adjusted revenues and adjusted pre-tax income (loss) are derived by excluding certain items from total revenues and net income (loss) attributable to AIG, respectively. For the items excluded from adjusted revenues and adjusted pre-tax income (loss) see the table below.\n188 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 3. Segment Information\nThe following table presents AIG’s continuing operations by operating segment:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 189\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 3. Segment Information\n* Includes all net realized capital gains and losses except earned income (periodic settlements and changes in settlement accruals) on derivative instruments used for non-qualifying (economic) hedging or for asset replication.\nThe following table presents AIG’s year-end identifiable assets and capital expenditures by legal entity category:\n190 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 3. Segment Information\nThe following table presents AIG’s consolidated total revenues and real estate and other fixed assets, net of accumulated depreciation, by major geographic area:\n* Revenues are generally reported according to the geographic location of the reporting unit. International revenues consists of revenues from our General Insurance International operating segment.\n4. Business Combination\nOn July 18, 2018, we completed the purchase of a 100 percent voting interest in Validus, a leading provider of reinsurance, primary insurance, and asset management services, for $5.5 billion in cash. This transaction was made with the intent to strengthen our global General Insurance business by expanding our current product portfolio through additional distribution channels and advancing the tools available to enhance underwriting. The impact of the acquisition on Total revenues, Net income (loss), and Net income (loss) attributable to AIG was $1.4 billion, $(206) million, and $(206) million, respectively, for 2018. Integration and transaction costs associated with the acquisition of Validus were $101 million for 2018 and are included in General operating and other expenses in our Consolidated Statement of Income.\nAs part of the purchase, we guaranteed 6,000 issued and outstanding 5.875% Non-Cumulative Preference Shares, Series A (the Series A Preference Shares) and 10,000 issued and outstanding 5.800% Non-Cumulative Preference Shares, Series B (together with the Series A Preference Shares, the Preference Shares). On October 30, 2018, Validus redeemed all of its outstanding Preference Shares at a redemption price of $26,000 per Preference Share for approximately $416 million in the aggregate.\nThe purchase was accounted for under the acquisition method. Accordingly, the total purchase price was allocated to the estimated fair values of assets acquired and liabilities assumed. This allocation resulted in the purchase price exceeding the fair value of net assets acquired, which results in a difference recorded as goodwill. Goodwill generated from the acquisition is attributable to expected synergies from future growth and potential future monetization opportunities. Goodwill related to the purchase of Validus assigned to our General Insurance operating segments was $1.8 billion for North America and $157 million for International.\nIn addition, Validus participates in the market for insurance-linked securities (ILS) primarily through AlphaCat Managers, Ltd (AlphaCat Manager). AlphaCat Manager is an asset manager primarily for third-party investors and in connection with the issuance of ILS invests in AlphaCat funds which are considered variable interest entities (VIEs). ILS are financial instruments for which the values are determined based on insurance losses caused primarily by natural catastrophes such as major earthquakes and hurricanes. We report the investment in AlphaCat funds, which is approximately $116 million at December 31, 2018, in Other Invested Assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 191\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 4. Business Combination\nThe following table summarizes the estimated provisional fair values of major classes of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed as of July 18, 2018:\n* Reported in Deferred policy acquisition costs in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.\nThe following unaudited summarized pro forma consolidated income statement information assumes that the acquisition of Validus occurred as of January 1, 2017. The pro forma amounts are for comparative purposes only, may not necessarily reflect the results of operations that would have resulted had the acquisition been completed at the beginning of the applicable period and may not be indicative of the results that will be attained in the future.\n* Pro forma adjustments were made to Validus external reporting results prior to the acquisition date for the deconsolidation of certain asset management entities consistent with AIG’s post acquisition accounting, which had no impact on Net income attributable to Validus.\nThe following table presents details of the identified intangible assets acquired:\n(a) Reported in Other assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.\n(b) Amortization is reported in General operating and other expenses in the Consolidated Statement of Income (Loss).\n(c) Reported in Deferred policy acquisition costs in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and Amortization of deferred policy acquisition costs in the Consolidated Statement of Income (Loss).\n192 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\n5. Fair Value Measurements\nFair Value Measurements on a Recurring Basis\nWe carry certain of our financial instruments at fair value. We define the fair value of a financial instrument as the amount that would be received from the sale of an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between market participants at the measurement date. We are responsible for the determination of the value of the investments carried at fair value and the supporting methodologies and assumptions.\nThe degree of judgment used in measuring the fair value of financial instruments generally inversely correlates with the level of observable valuation inputs. We maximize the use of observable inputs and minimize the use of unobservable inputs when measuring fair value. Financial instruments with quoted prices in active markets generally have more pricing observability and less judgment is used in measuring fair value. Conversely, financial instruments for which no quoted prices are available have less observability and are measured at fair value using valuation models or other pricing techniques that require more judgment. Pricing observability is affected by a number of factors, including the type of financial instrument, whether the financial instrument is new to the market and not yet established, the characteristics specific to the transaction, liquidity and general market conditions.\nFair Value Hierarchy\nAssets and liabilities recorded at fair value in the Consolidated Balance Sheets are measured and classified in accordance with a fair value hierarchy consisting of three “levels” based on the observability of valuation inputs:\n• Level 1: Fair value measurements based on quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets that we have the ability to access for identical assets or liabilities. Market price data generally is obtained from exchange or dealer markets. We do not adjust the quoted price for such instruments.\n• Level 2: Fair value measurements based on inputs other than quoted prices included in Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or indirectly. Level 2 inputs include quoted prices for similar assets and liabilities in active markets, quoted prices for identical or similar assets or liabilities in markets that are not active, and inputs other than quoted prices that are observable for the asset or liability, such as interest rates and yield curves that are observable at commonly quoted intervals.\n• Level 3: Fair value measurements based on valuation techniques that use significant inputs that are unobservable. Both observable and unobservable inputs may be used to determine the fair values of positions classified in Level 3. The circumstances for using these measurements include those in which there is little, if any, market activity for the asset or liability. Therefore, we must make certain assumptions about the inputs a hypothetical market participant would use to value that asset or liability.\nIn certain cases, the inputs used to measure fair value may fall into different levels of the fair value hierarchy. In such cases, the level in the fair value hierarchy within which the fair value measurement in its entirety falls is determined based on the lowest level input that is significant to the fair value measurement in its entirety.\nThe following is a description of the valuation methodologies used for instruments carried at fair value. These methodologies are applied to assets and liabilities across the levels discussed above, and it is the observability of the inputs used that determines the appropriate level in the fair value hierarchy for the respective asset or liability.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 193\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nValuation Methodologies of Financial Instruments Measured at Fair Value\nIncorporation of Credit Risk in Fair Value Measurements\n• Our Own Credit Risk. Fair value measurements for certain liabilities incorporate our own credit risk by determining the explicit cost for each counterparty to protect against its net credit exposure to us at the balance sheet date by reference to observable AIG CDS or cash bond spreads. We calculate the effect of credit spread changes using discounted cash flow techniques that incorporate current market interest rates. A derivative counterparty’s net credit exposure to us is determined based on master netting agreements, when applicable, which take into consideration all derivative positions with us, as well as collateral we post with the counterparty at the balance sheet date. For a description of how we incorporate our own credit risk in the valuation of embedded derivatives related to certain annuity and life insurance products see Embedded Derivatives within Policyholder Contract Deposits below.\n• Counterparty Credit Risk. Fair value measurements for freestanding derivatives incorporate counterparty credit by determining the explicit cost for us to protect against our net credit exposure to each counterparty at the balance sheet date by reference to observable counterparty CDS spreads, when available. When not available, other directly or indirectly observable credit spreads will be used to derive the best estimates of the counterparty spreads. Our net credit exposure to a counterparty is determined based on master netting agreements, which take into consideration all derivative positions with the counterparty, as well as collateral posted by the counterparty at the balance sheet date.\nFair values for fixed maturity securities based on observable market prices for identical or similar instruments implicitly incorporate counterparty credit risk. Fair values for fixed maturity securities based on internal models incorporate counterparty credit risk by using discount rates that take into consideration cash issuance spreads for similar instruments or other observable information.\nFor fair values measured based on internal models, the cost of credit protection is determined under a discounted present value approach considering the market levels for single name CDS spreads for each specific counterparty, the mid-market value of the net exposure (reflecting the amount of protection required) and the weighted average life of the net exposure. CDS spreads are provided to us by an independent third party. We utilize an interest rate based on the benchmark London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) curve to derive our discount rates.\nWhile this approach does not explicitly consider all potential future behavior of the derivative transactions or potential future changes in valuation inputs, we believe this approach provides a reasonable estimate of the fair value of the assets and liabilities, including consideration of the impact of non-performance risk.\nFixed Maturity Securities\nWhenever available, we obtain quoted prices in active markets for identical assets at the balance sheet date to measure fixed maturity securities at fair value. Market price data is generally obtained from dealer markets.\nWe employ independent third-party valuation service providers to gather, analyze, and interpret market information to derive fair value estimates for individual investments, based upon market-accepted methodologies and assumptions. The methodologies used by these independent third-party valuation service providers are reviewed and understood by management, through periodic discussion with and information provided by the independent third-party valuation service providers. In addition, as discussed further below, control processes are applied to the fair values received from independent third-party valuation service providers to ensure the accuracy of these values.\nValuation service providers typically obtain data about market transactions and other key valuation model inputs from multiple sources and, through the use of market-accepted valuation methodologies, which may utilize matrix pricing, financial models, accompanying model inputs and various assumptions, provide a single fair value measurement for individual securities. The inputs used by the valuation service providers include, but are not limited to, market prices from completed transactions for identical securities and transactions for comparable securities, benchmark yields, interest rate yield curves, credit spreads, prepayment rates, default rates, recovery assumptions, currency rates, quoted prices for similar securities and other market-observable information, as applicable. If fair value is determined using financial models, these models generally take into account, among other things, market observable information as of the measurement date as well as the specific attributes of the security being valued, including its term, interest rate, credit rating, industry sector, and when applicable, collateral quality and other security or issuer-specific information. When market transactions or other market observable data is limited, the extent to which judgment is applied in determining fair value is greatly increased.\n194 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nWe have control processes designed to ensure that the fair values received from independent third-party valuation service providers are accurately recorded, that their data inputs and valuation techniques are appropriate and consistently applied and that the assumptions used appear reasonable and consistent with the objective of determining fair value. We assess the reasonableness of individual security values received from independent third-party valuation service providers through various analytical techniques, and have procedures to escalate related questions internally and to the independent third-party valuation service providers for resolution. To assess the degree of pricing consensus among various valuation service providers for specific asset types, we conduct comparisons of prices received from available sources. We use these comparisons to establish a hierarchy for the fair values received from independent third-party valuation service providers to be used for particular security classes. We also validate prices for selected securities through reviews by members of management who have relevant expertise and who are independent of those charged with executing investing transactions.\nWhen our independent third-party valuation service providers are unable to obtain sufficient market observable information upon which to estimate the fair value for a particular security, fair value is determined either by requesting brokers who are knowledgeable about these securities to provide a price quote, which is generally non-binding, or by employing market accepted valuation models. Broker prices may be based on an income approach, which converts expected future cash flows to a single present value amount, with specific consideration of inputs relevant to particular security types. For structured securities, such inputs may include ratings, collateral types, geographic concentrations, underlying loan vintages, loan delinquencies and defaults, loss severity assumptions, prepayments, and weighted average coupons and maturities. When the volume or level of market activity for a security is limited, certain inputs used to determine fair value may not be observable in the market. Broker prices may also be based on a market approach that considers recent transactions involving identical or similar securities. Fair values provided by brokers are subject to similar control processes to those noted above for fair values from independent third-party valuation service providers, including management reviews. For those corporate debt instruments (for example, private placements) that are not traded in active markets or that are subject to transfer restrictions, valuations reflect illiquidity and non-transferability, based on available market evidence. When observable price quotations are not available, fair value is determined based on discounted cash flow models using discount rates based on credit spreads, yields or price levels of comparable securities, adjusted for illiquidity and structure. Fair values determined internally are also subject to management review to ensure that valuation models and related inputs are reasonable.\nThe methodology above is relevant for all fixed maturity securities including residential mortgage backed securities (RMBS), commercial mortgage backed securities (CMBS), collateralized debt obligations (CDO), other asset-backed securities (ABS) and fixed maturity securities issued by government sponsored entities and corporate entities.\nEquity Securities Traded in Active Markets\nWhenever available, we obtain quoted prices in active markets for identical assets at the balance sheet date to measure equity securities at fair value. Market price data is generally obtained from exchange or dealer markets.\nMortgage and Other Loans Receivable\nWe estimate the fair value of mortgage and other loans receivable that are measured at fair value by using dealer quotations, discounted cash flow analyses and/or internal valuation models. The determination of fair value considers inputs such as interest rate, maturity, the borrower’s creditworthiness, collateral, subordination, guarantees, past-due status, yield curves, credit curves, prepayment rates, market pricing for comparable loans and other relevant factors.\nOther Invested Assets\nWe initially estimate the fair value of investments in certain hedge funds, private equity funds and other investment partnerships by reference to the transaction price. Subsequently, we generally obtain the fair value of these investments from net asset value information provided by the general partner or manager of the investments, the financial statements of which are generally audited annually. We consider observable market data and perform certain control procedures to validate the appropriateness of using the net asset value as a fair value measurement. The fair values of other investments carried at fair value, such as direct private equity holdings, are initially determined based on transaction price and are subsequently estimated based on available evidence such as market transactions in similar instruments, other financing transactions of the issuer and other available financial information for the issuer, with adjustments made to reflect illiquidity as appropriate.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 195\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nShort-term Investments\nFor short-term investments that are measured at amortized cost, the carrying amounts of these assets approximate fair values because of the relatively short period of time between origination and expected realization, and their limited exposure to credit risk. Securities purchased under agreements to resell (reverse repurchase agreements) are generally treated as collateralized receivables. We report certain receivables arising from securities purchased under agreements to resell as Short-term investments in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. When these receivables are measured at fair value, we use market-observable interest rates to determine fair value.\nSeparate Account Assets\nSeparate account assets are composed primarily of registered and unregistered open-end mutual funds that generally trade daily and are measured at fair value in the manner discussed above for equity securities traded in active markets.\nFreestanding Derivatives\nDerivative assets and liabilities can be exchange-traded or traded over-the-counter (OTC). We generally value exchange-traded derivatives such as futures and options using quoted prices in active markets for identical derivatives at the balance sheet date.\nOTC derivatives are valued using market transactions and other market evidence whenever possible, including market-based inputs to models, model calibration to market clearing transactions, broker or dealer quotations or alternative pricing sources with reasonable levels of price transparency. When models are used, the selection of a particular model to value an OTC derivative depends on the contractual terms of, and specific risks inherent in the instrument, as well as the availability of pricing information in the market. We generally use similar models to value similar instruments. Valuation models require a variety of inputs, including contractual terms, market prices and rates, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility, prepayment rates and correlations of such inputs. For OTC derivatives that trade in liquid markets, such as generic forwards, swaps and options, model inputs can generally be corroborated by observable market data by correlation or other means, and model selection does not involve significant management judgment.\nFor certain OTC derivatives that trade in less liquid markets, where we generally do not have corroborating market evidence to support significant model inputs and cannot verify the model to market transactions, the transaction price may provide the best estimate of fair value. Accordingly, when a pricing model is used to value such an instrument, the model is adjusted so the model value at inception equals the transaction price. We will update valuation inputs in these models only when corroborated by evidence such as similar market transactions, independent third-party valuation service providers and/or broker or dealer quotations, or other empirical market data. When appropriate, valuations are adjusted for various factors such as liquidity, bid/offer spreads and credit considerations. Such adjustments are generally based on available market evidence. In the absence of such evidence, management’s best estimate is used.\nWe value our super senior credit default swap portfolio using prices obtained from vendors and/or counterparties. The valuation of the super senior credit derivatives is complex because of the limited availability of market observable information due to the lack of trading and price transparency in certain structured finance markets. Our valuation methodologies for the super senior CDS portfolio have evolved over time in response to market conditions and the availability of market observable information. We have sought to calibrate the methodologies to available market information and to review the assumptions of the methodologies on a regular basis.\nEmbedded Derivatives within Policyholder Contract Deposits\nCertain variable annuity and equity-indexed annuity and life contracts contain embedded derivatives that we bifurcate from the host contracts and account for separately at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in earnings. These embedded derivatives are classified within Policyholder contract deposits. We have concluded these contracts contain either (i) a written option that guarantees a minimum accumulation value at maturity, (ii) a written option that guarantees annual withdrawals regardless of underlying market performance for a specific period or for life, or (iii) equity-indexed written options that meet the criteria of derivatives and must be bifurcated.\n196 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nThe fair value of embedded derivatives contained in certain variable annuity and equity-indexed annuity and life contracts is measured based on policyholder behavior and capital market assumptions related to projected cash flows over the expected lives of the contracts. These discounted cash flow projections primarily include benefits and related fees assessed, when applicable. In some instances, the projected cash flows from fees may exceed projected cash flows related to benefit payments and therefore, at a point in time, the carrying value of the embedded derivative may be in a net asset position. The projected cash flows incorporate best estimate assumptions for policyholder behavior (including mortality, lapses, withdrawals and benefit utilization), along with an explicit risk margin to reflect a market participant’s estimates of projected cash flows and policyholder behavior. Estimates of future policyholder behavior assumptions are subjective and based primarily on our historical experience.\nBecause of the dynamic and complex nature of the projected cash flows with respect to embedded derivatives in our variable annuity contracts, risk neutral valuations are used, which are calibrated to observable interest rate and equity option prices. Estimating the underlying cash flows for these products involves judgments regarding expected market rates of return, market volatility, credit spreads, correlations of certain market variables, fund performance, discount rates and policyholder behavior. The portion of fees attributable to the fair value of expected benefit payments are included within the fair value measurement of these embedded derivatives, and related fees are classified in net realized gain/loss as earned, consistent with other changes in the fair value of these embedded policy derivatives. Any portion of the fees not attributed to the embedded derivatives are excluded from the fair value measurement and classified in policy fees as earned.\nWith respect to embedded derivatives in our equity-indexed annuity and life contracts, option pricing models are used to estimate fair value, taking into account assumptions for future equity index growth rates, volatility of the equity index, future interest rates, and our ability to adjust the participation rate and the cap on equity-indexed credited rates in light of market conditions and policyholder behavior assumptions.\nProjected cash flows are discounted using the interest rate swap curve (swap curve), which is commonly viewed as being consistent with the credit spreads for highly-rated financial institutions (S&P AA-rated or above). A swap curve shows the fixed-rate leg of a non-complex swap against the floating rate (for example, LIBOR) leg of a related tenor. We also incorporate our own risk of non-performance in the valuation of the embedded derivatives associated with variable annuity and equity-indexed annuity and life contracts. The non-performance risk adjustment reflects a market participant’s view of our claims-paying ability by incorporating an additional spread to the swap curve used to discount projected benefit cash flows in the valuation of these embedded derivatives. The non-performance risk adjustment is calculated by constructing forward rates based on a weighted average of observable corporate credit indices to approximate the claims-paying ability rating of our Life and Retirement companies.\nLong-Term Debt\nThe fair value of non-structured liabilities is generally determined by using market prices from exchange or dealer markets, when available, or discounting expected cash flows using the appropriate discount rate for the applicable maturity. We determine the fair value of structured liabilities and hybrid financial instruments (where performance is linked to structured interest rates, inflation or currency risks) using the appropriate derivative valuation methodology (described above) given the nature of the embedded risk profile. In addition, adjustments are made to the valuations of both non-structured and structured liabilities to reflect our own creditworthiness based on the methodology described under the caption “Incorporation of Credit Risk in Fair Value Measurements - Our Own Credit Risk” above.\nBorrowings under obligations of guaranteed investment agreements (GIAs), which are guaranteed by us, are recorded at fair value using discounted cash flow calculations based on interest rates currently being offered for similar contracts and our current market observable implicit credit spread rates with maturities consistent with those remaining for the contracts being valued. Obligations may be called at various times prior to maturity at the option of the counterparty. Interest rates on these borrowings are primarily fixed, vary by maturity and range up to 7.62 percent.\nOther Liabilities\nOther liabilities measured at fair value include certain securities sold under agreements to repurchase and certain securities sold but not yet purchased. Liabilities arising from securities sold under agreements to repurchase are generally treated as collateralized borrowings. We estimate the fair value of liabilities arising under these agreements by using market-observable interest rates. This methodology considers such factors as the coupon rate, yield curves and other relevant factors. Fair values for securities sold but not yet purchased are based on current market prices.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 197\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nAssets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis\nThe following table presents information about assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis and indicates the level of the fair value measurement based on the observability of the inputs used:\n198 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\n(a) Represents netting of derivative exposures covered by qualifying master netting agreements.\n(b) As a result of the adoption of the Recognition and Measurement of Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities standard on January 1, 2018 (Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Standard), equity securities are no longer classified and accounted for as available for sale securities.\n(c) Excludes investments that are measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent), which totaled $5.0 billion and $6.0 billion as of December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017, respectively.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 199\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nTransfers of Level 1 and Level 2 Assets and Liabilities\nOur policy is to record transfers of assets and liabilities between Level 1 and Level 2 at their fair values as of the end of each reporting period, consistent with the date of the determination of fair value. Assets are transferred out of Level 1 when they are no longer transacted with sufficient frequency and volume in an active market. Conversely, assets are transferred from Level 2 to Level 1 when transaction volume and frequency are indicative of an active market.\nDuring the year ended December 31, 2017, we transferred $392 million of securities issued by non-U.S. government entities from Level 1 to Level 2, because they are no longer considered actively traded. We had no material transfers of securities issued by non-U.S. government entities from Level 1 to Level 2 during the year ended December 31, 2018. For similar reasons, during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, we transferred $806 million and $113 million, respectively, of securities issued by the U.S. government and government-sponsored entities from Level 1 to Level 2. Additionally, we transferred $126 million of preferred stock from Level 1 to Level 2 during the year ended December 31, 2017. We had no material transfers of preferred stock from Level 1 to Level 2 during the year ended December 31, 2018. There were no material transfers from Level 2 to Level 1 during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017.\n200 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nChanges in Level 3 Recurring Fair Value Measurements\nThe following tables present changes during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 in Level 3 assets and liabilities measured at fair value on a recurring basis, and the realized and unrealized gains (losses) related to the Level 3 assets and liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets at December 31, 2018 and 2017:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 201\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\n(a) As a result of the adoption of the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Standard on January 1, 2018, equity securities are no longer classified and accounted for as available for sale securities.\n202 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\n(b) Total Level 3 derivative exposures have been netted in these tables for presentation purposes only.\n(c) Includes guaranteed investment agreements (GIAs), notes, bonds, loans and mortgages payable.\nNet realized and unrealized gains and losses included in income related to Level 3 assets and liabilities shown above are reported in the Consolidated Statements of Income as follows:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 203\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nThe following table presents the gross components of purchases, sales, issuances and settlements, net, shown above for years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017 related to Level 3 assets and liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet:\n(a) There were no issuances during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017.\n(b) Includes GIAs, notes, bonds, loans and mortgages payable.\n204 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nBoth observable and unobservable inputs may be used to determine the fair values of positions classified in Level 3 in the tables above. As a result, the unrealized gains (losses) on instruments held at December 31, 2018 and 2017 may include changes in fair value that were attributable to both observable (e.g., changes in market interest rates) and unobservable inputs (e.g., changes in unobservable long-dated volatilities).\nTransfers of Level 3 Assets and Liabilities\nWe record transfers of assets and liabilities into or out of Level 3 classification at their fair values as of the end of each reporting period, consistent with the date of the determination of fair value. The Net realized and unrealized gains (losses) included in income (loss) or Other comprehensive income (loss) as shown in the table above excludes $33 million of net gains and $64 million of net losses related to assets and liabilities transferred into Level 3 during 2018 and 2017, respectively, and includes $18 million and $36 million of net losses related to assets and liabilities transferred out of Level 3 during 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nTransfers of Level 3 Assets\nDuring the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, transfers into Level 3 assets primarily included certain investments in private placement corporate debt, RMBS, CMBS and CDO/ABS. Transfers of private placement corporate debt and certain ABS into Level 3 assets were primarily the result of limited market pricing information that required us to determine fair value for these securities based on inputs that are adjusted to better reflect our own assumptions regarding the characteristics of a specific security or associated market liquidity. The transfers of investments in RMBS, CMBS and CDO and certain ABS into Level 3 assets were due to decreases in market transparency and liquidity for individual security types.\nDuring the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, transfers out of Level 3 assets primarily included private placement and other corporate debt, CMBS, RMBS, CDO/ABS and certain investments in municipal securities. Transfers of certain investments in municipal securities, corporate debt, RMBS, CMBS and CDO/ABS out of Level 3 assets were based on consideration of market liquidity as well as related transparency of pricing and associated observable inputs for these investments. Transfers of certain investments in private placement corporate debt and certain ABS out of Level 3 assets were primarily the result of using observable pricing information that reflects the fair value of those securities without the need for adjustment based on our own assumptions regarding the characteristics of a specific security or the current liquidity in the market.\nTransfers of Level 3 Liabilities\nThere were no significant transfers of derivative or other liabilities into or out of Level 3 for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 205\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nQuantitative Information about Level 3 Fair Value Measurements\nThe table below presents information about the significant unobservable inputs used for recurring fair value measurements for certain Level 3 instruments, and includes only those instruments for which information about the inputs is reasonably available to us, such as data from independent third-party valuation service providers and from internal valuation models. Because input information from third-parties with respect to certain Level 3 instruments (primarily CDO/ABS) may not be reasonably available to us, balances shown below may not equal total amounts reported for such Level 3 assets and liabilities:\n206 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\n(a) Information received from third-party valuation service providers. The ranges of the unobservable inputs for constant prepayment rate, loss severity and constant default rate relate to each of the individual underlying mortgage loans that comprise the entire portfolio of securities in the RMBS and CDO securitization vehicles and not necessarily to the securitization vehicle bonds (tranches) purchased by us. The ranges of these inputs do not directly correlate to changes in the fair values of the tranches purchased by us, because there are other factors relevant to the fair values of specific tranches owned by us including, but not limited to, purchase price, position in the waterfall, senior versus subordinated position and attachment points.\n(b) Represents discount rates, estimates and assumptions that we believe would be used by market participants when valuing these assets and liabilities.\n(c) Mortality inputs are shown as multipliers of the 2012 Individual Annuity Mortality Basic table.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 207\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nThe ranges of reported inputs for Obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions, Corporate debt, RMBS, CDO/ABS, and CMBS valued using a discounted cash flow technique consist of one standard deviation in either direction from the value-weighted average. The preceding table does not give effect to our risk management practices that might offset risks inherent in these Level 3 assets and liabilities.\nSensitivity to Changes in Unobservable Inputs\nWe consider unobservable inputs to be those for which market data is not available and that are developed using the best information available to us about the assumptions that market participants would use when pricing the asset or liability. Relevant inputs vary depending on the nature of the instrument being measured at fair value. The following paragraphs provide a general description of sensitivities of significant unobservable inputs along with interrelationships between and among the significant unobservable inputs and their impact on the fair value measurements. The effect of a change in a particular assumption in the sensitivity analysis below is considered independently of changes in any other assumptions. In practice, simultaneous changes in assumptions may not always have a linear effect on the inputs discussed below. Interrelationships may also exist between observable and unobservable inputs. Such relationships have not been included in the discussion below. For each of the individual relationships described below, the inverse relationship would also generally apply.\nObligations of States, Municipalities and Political Subdivisions\nThe significant unobservable input used in the fair value measurement of certain investments in obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions is yield. In general, increases in the yield would decrease the fair value of investments in obligations of states, municipalities and political subdivisions.\nCorporate Debt\nCorporate debt securities included in Level 3 are primarily private placement issuances that are not traded in active markets or that are subject to transfer restrictions. Fair value measurements consider illiquidity and non-transferability. When observable price quotations are not available, fair value is determined based on discounted cash flow models using discount rates based on credit spreads, yields or price levels of publicly-traded debt of the issuer or other comparable securities, considering illiquidity and structure. The significant unobservable input used in the fair value measurement of corporate debt is the yield. The yield is affected by the market movements in credit spreads and U.S. Treasury yields. In addition, the migration in credit quality of a given security generally has a corresponding effect on the fair value measurement of the security. For example, a downward migration of credit quality would increase spreads. Holding U.S. Treasury rates constant, an increase in corporate credit spreads would decrease the fair value of corporate debt.\nRMBS and CDO/ABS\nThe significant unobservable inputs used in fair value measurements of RMBS and certain CDO/ABS valued by third-party valuation service providers are constant prepayment rates (CPR), loss severity, constant default rates (CDR) and yield. A change in the assumptions used for the probability of default will generally be accompanied by a corresponding change in the assumption used for the loss severity and an inverse change in the assumption used for prepayment rates. In general, increases in CPR, loss severity, CDR and yield, in isolation, would result in a decrease in the fair value measurement. Changes in fair value based on variations in assumptions generally cannot be extrapolated because the relationship between the directional change of each input is not usually linear.\nCMBS\nThe significant unobservable input used in fair value measurements for CMBS is the yield. Prepayment assumptions for each mortgage pool are factored into the yield. CMBS generally feature a lower degree of prepayment risk than RMBS because commercial mortgages generally contain a penalty for prepayment. In general, increases in the yield would decrease the fair value of CMBS.\n208 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nEmbedded derivatives within Policyholder contract deposits\nEmbedded derivatives reported within Policyholder contract deposits include GMWB within variable annuity products and interest crediting rates based on market indices within index annuities, indexed life and guaranteed investment contracts (GICs). For any given contract, assumptions for unobservable inputs vary throughout the period over which cash flows are projected for purposes of valuing the embedded derivative. The following unobservable inputs are used for valuing embedded derivatives measured at fair value:\n• Long-term equity volatilities represent equity volatility beyond the period for which observable equity volatilities are available. Increases in assumed volatility will generally increase the fair value of both the projected cash flows from rider fees as well as the projected cash flows related to benefit payments. Therefore, the net change in the fair value of the liability may be either a decrease or an increase, depending on the relative changes in projected rider fees and projected benefit payments.\n• Equity / interest rate correlation estimates the relationship between changes in equity returns and interest rates in the economic scenario generator used to value our GMWB embedded derivatives. In general, a higher positive correlation assumes that equity markets and interest rates move in a more correlated fashion, which generally increases the fair value of the liability.\n• Base lapse rate assumptions are determined by company experience and are adjusted at the contract level using a dynamic lapse function, which reduces the base lapse rate when the contract is in-the-money (when the contract holder’s guaranteed value, as estimated by the company, is worth more than their underlying account value). Lapse rates are also generally assumed to be lower in periods when a surrender charge applies. Increases in assumed lapse rates will generally decrease the fair value of the liability, as fewer policyholders would persist to collect guaranteed withdrawal amounts.\n• Mortality rate assumptions, which vary by age and gender, are based on company experience and include a mortality improvement assumption. Increases in assumed mortality rates will decrease the fair value of the liability, while lower mortality rate assumptions will generally increase the fair value of the liability, because guaranteed payments will be made for a longer period of time.\n• Utilization assumptions estimate the timing when policyholders with a GMWB will elect to utilize their benefit and begin taking withdrawals. The assumptions may vary by the type of guarantee, tax-qualified status, the contract’s withdrawal history and the age of the policyholder. Utilization assumptions are based on company experience, which includes partial withdrawal behavior. Increases in assumed utilization rates will generally increase the fair value of the liability.\n• Option budget estimates the expected long-term cost of options used to hedge exposures associated with equity price changes. The level of option budgets determines future costs of the options, which impacts the growth in account value and the valuation of embedded derivatives.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 209\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nInvestments in Certain Entities Carried at Fair Value Using Net Asset Value Per Share\nThe following table includes information related to our investments in certain other invested assets, including private equity funds, hedge funds and other alternative investments that calculate net asset value per share (or its equivalent). For these investments, which are measured at fair value on a recurring basis, we use the net asset value per share to measure fair value.\n* Beginning in the third quarter of 2018, Growth Equity and Mezzanine private equity fund categories are shown separately. Prior periods were revised to conform to the current period presentation.\n210 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nPrivate equity fund investments included above are not redeemable, because distributions from the funds will be received when underlying investments of the funds are liquidated. Private equity funds are generally expected to have 10-year lives at their inception, but these lives may be extended at the fund manager’s discretion, typically in one or two-year increments. At December 31, 2018, assuming average original expected lives of 10 years for the funds, 14 percent of the total fair value using net asset value per share (or its equivalent) presented above would have expected remaining lives of three years or less, 43 percent between four and six years and 43 percent between seven and 10 years.\nThe hedge fund investments included above, which are carried at fair value, are generally redeemable monthly (35 percent), quarterly (32 percent), semi-annually (9 percent) and annually (24 percent), with redemption notices ranging from one day to 180 days. At December 31, 2018, investments representing approximately 51 percent of the total fair value of these hedge fund investments had partial contractual redemption restrictions. These partial redemption restrictions are generally related to one or more investments held in the hedge funds that the fund manager deemed to be illiquid. The majority of these contractual restrictions, which may have been put in place at the fund’s inception or thereafter, have pre-defined end dates. The majority of these restrictions are generally expected to be lifted by the end of 2019.\nFair Value Option\nUnder the fair value option, we may elect to measure at fair value financial assets and financial liabilities that are not otherwise required to be carried at fair value. Subsequent changes in fair value for designated items are reported in earnings. We elect the fair value option for certain hybrid securities given the complexity of bifurcating the economic components associated with the embedded derivatives.\nFor additional information related to embedded derivatives refer to Note 11 herein.\nAdditionally, we elect the fair value option for certain alternative investments when such investments are eligible for this election. We believe this measurement basis is consistent with the applicable accounting guidance used by the respective investment company funds themselves.\nFor additional information on securities and other invested assets for which we have elected the fair value option refer to Note 6 herein.\nThe following table presents the gains or losses recorded related to the eligible instruments for which we elected the fair value option:\n(a) Includes certain hedge funds, private equity funds and other investment partnerships.\n(b) Includes GIAs, notes, bonds and mortgages payable.\nInterest income and dividend income on assets measured under the fair value option are recognized and included in Net investment income in the Consolidated Statements of Income with the exception of activity within AIG’s Other Operations category, which is included in Other income. Interest expense on liabilities measured under the fair value option is reported in Other Income in the Consolidated Statements of Income.\nFor additional information about our policies for recognition, measurement, and disclosure of interest and dividend income see Note 6 herein.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 211\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nDuring 2017 and 2016, we recognized gains of $4 million and $22 million, respectively, attributable to the observable effect of changes in credit spreads on our own liabilities for which the fair value option was elected. We calculate the effect of these credit spread changes using discounted cash flow techniques that incorporate current market interest rates, our observable credit spreads on these liabilities and other factors that mitigate the risk of nonperformance such as cash collateral posted.\nAs a result of the adoption of the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Standard on January 1, 2018, we are required to record unrealized gains and losses attributable to the observable effect of changes in credit spreads on our liabilities for which the fair value option was elected in Other Comprehensive Income. An unrealized gain of $4 million was recognized in Other Comprehensive Income for year ended December 31, 2018.\nThe following table presents the difference between fair values and the aggregate contractual principal amounts of mortgage and other loans receivable and long-term debt for which the fair value option was elected:\n* Includes GIAs, notes, bonds, loans and mortgages payable.\nThere were no mortgage or other loans receivable for which the fair value option was elected that were 90 days or more past due or in non-accrual status at December 31, 2018 or 2017.\nFAIR VALUE MEASUREMENTS ON A NON-RECURRING BASIS\nWe measure the fair value of certain assets on a non-recurring basis, generally quarterly, annually or when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount of the assets may not be recoverable. These assets include cost and equity-method investments, commercial mortgage loans, investments in life settlements, investments in real estate and other fixed assets, goodwill and other intangible assets.\nFor additional information about how we test various asset classes for impairment see Notes 6 and 7 herein.\nInformation regarding the estimation of fair value for financial instruments measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis is discussed below:\n• Impairments for Other investments for the period ended December 31, 2016 primarily relate to certain investments in aircraft, the fair values of which are determined based on third-party independent appraisals that use industry specific appraisal standards and methodologies. Impairments for Other investments for the period ended December 31, 2017 primarily relate to commercial mortgage loans, the fair values of which are determined based on independent broker quotations or valuation models using unobservable inputs, as well as the estimated fair value of the underlying collateral or the present value of the expected future cash flows. The rest of the impairments relate to real estate investments, the fair values of which are determined based on third-party independent appraisals or discounted cash-flow models, as well as certain investments in aircraft, the fair values of which are determined based on third-party independent appraisals that use industry-specific appraisal standards and methodologies. Impairments for Other investments for the period ended December 31, 2018 primarily relate to real estate investments as well as commercial mortgage loans, the fair value determination for which is discussed above under the heading Valuation Methodologies of Financial Instruments Measured at Fair Value.\n• Impairments of Investments in Life Settlements were measured using their fair values as determined using a discounted cash flow methodology that incorporates the best available market assumptions for mortality as well as market yields based on reported transactions or the anticipated sale price, as appropriate. We sold the remaining portion of our life settlements portfolio in 2017.\n212 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nThe following table presents assets measured at fair value on a non-recurring basis at the time of impairment and the related impairment charges recorded during the periods presented:\n(a) Impairments in 2017 included $35 million related to Other assets of $179 million that were sold during the three-month period ended June 30, 2017.\nFAIR VALUE INFORMATION ABOUT FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS NOT MEASURED AT FAIR VALUE\nInformation regarding the estimation of fair value for financial instruments not carried at fair value (excluding insurance contracts and lease contracts) is discussed below:\n• Mortgage and other loans receivable: Fair values of loans on commercial real estate and other loans receivable are estimated for disclosure purposes using discounted cash flow calculations based on discount rates that we believe market participants would use in determining the price that they would pay for such assets. For certain loans, our current incremental lending rates for similar types of loans are used as the discount rates, because we believe this rate approximates the rates market participants would use. Fair values of residential mortgage loans are generally determined based on market prices, using market based adjustments for credit and servicing as appropriate. The fair values of policy loans are generally estimated based on unpaid principal amount as of each reporting date. No consideration is given to credit risk because policy loans are effectively collateralized by the cash surrender value of the policies.\n• Other invested assets: The majority of Other invested assets that are not measured at fair value in 2016 represent investments in life settlements. The fair value of investments in life settlements is determined using a discounted cash flow methodology that incorporates the best available market assumptions for longevity as well as market yields based on reported transactions. Due to the individual life nature of each investment in life settlements and the illiquidity of the existing market, significant inputs to the fair value are unobservable. The majority of the Other invested assets that are not measured at fair value in 2017 and 2018 represent time deposits with the original maturity at purchase greater than one year. The fair value of long-term time deposits is determined using the expected discounted future cash flow.\n• Cash and short-term investments: The carrying amounts of these assets approximate fair values because of the relatively short period of time between origination and expected realization, and their limited exposure to credit risk.\n• Policyholder contract deposits associated with investment-type contracts: Fair values for policyholder contract deposits associated with investment-type contracts not accounted for at fair value are estimated using discounted cash flow calculations based on interest rates currently being offered for similar contracts with maturities consistent with those of the contracts being valued. When no similar contracts are being offered, the discount rate is the appropriate swap rate (if available) or current risk-free interest rate consistent with the currency in which the cash flows are denominated. To determine fair value, other factors include current policyholder account values and related surrender charges and other assumptions include expectations about policyholder behavior and an appropriate risk margin.\n• Other liabilities: The majority of Other liabilities that are financial instruments not measured at fair value represent secured financing arrangements, including repurchase agreements. The carrying amounts of these liabilities approximate fair value, because the financing arrangements are short-term and are secured by cash or other liquid collateral.\n• Long-term debt: Fair values of these obligations were determined by reference to quoted market prices, when available and appropriate, or discounted cash flow calculations based upon our current market-observable implicit-credit-spread rates for similar types of borrowings with maturities consistent with those remaining for the debt being valued.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 213\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 5. Fair Value Measurements\nThe following table presents the carrying amounts and estimated fair values of our financial instruments not measured at fair value and indicates the level in the fair value hierarchy of the estimated fair value measurement based on the observability of the inputs used:\n6. Investments\nFixed Maturity and Equity Securities\nBonds held to maturity are carried at amortized cost when we have the ability and positive intent to hold these securities until maturity. When we do not have the ability or positive intent to hold bonds until maturity, these securities are classified as available for sale or are measured at fair value at our election. None of our fixed maturity securities met the criteria for held to maturity classification at December 31, 2018 or 2017.\nOn January 1, 2018, AIG adopted ASU 2016-01, the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement standard for equity securities which eliminates the available for sale classification and treatment for equity securities. As a result, equity securities that do not follow the equity method of accounting, are measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in earnings.\nPrior to the adoption of this standard, unrealized gains and losses from available for sale investments in fixed maturity and equity securities carried at fair value were reported as a separate component of Accumulated other comprehensive income, net of deferred policy acquisition costs and deferred income taxes, in shareholders’ equity. Realized and unrealized gains and losses from fixed maturity and equity securities measured at fair value at our election are reflected in Net investment income (for insurance subsidiaries) or Other income (for Other Operations). Investments in fixed maturity and equity securities are recorded on a trade-date basis.\nPremiums and discounts arising from the purchase of bonds classified as available for sale are treated as yield adjustments over their estimated holding periods, until maturity, or call date, if applicable. For investments in certain RMBS, CMBS and CDO/ABS, (collectively, structured securities), recognized yields are updated based on current information regarding the timing and amount of expected undiscounted future cash flows. For high credit quality structured securities, effective yields are recalculated based on actual payments received and updated prepayment expectations, and the amortized cost is adjusted to the amount that would have existed had the new effective yield been applied since acquisition with a corresponding charge or credit to net investment income. For structured securities that are not high credit quality, effective yields are recalculated and adjusted prospectively based on changes in expected undiscounted future cash flows. For purchased credit impaired (PCI) securities, at acquisition, the difference between the\n214 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nundiscounted expected future cash flows and the recorded investment in the securities represents the initial accretable yield, which is to be accreted into net investment income over the securities’ remaining lives on an effective level-yield basis. Subsequently, effective yields recognized on PCI securities are recalculated and adjusted prospectively to reflect changes in the contractual benchmark interest rates on variable rate securities and any significant increases in undiscounted expected future cash flows arising due to reasons other than interest rate changes.\nSecurities Available for Sale\nThe following table presents the amortized cost or cost and fair value of our available for sale securities(a):\n(a) As a result of the adoption of the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Standard on January 1, 2018, equity securities are no longer classified and accounted for as available for sale securities.\n(b) Represents the amount of other-than-temporary impairments recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive income (loss). Amount includes unrealized gains and losses on impaired securities relating to changes in the fair value of such securities subsequent to the impairment measurement date.\n(c) At December 31, 2018 and 2017, bonds available for sale held by us that were below investment grade or not rated totaled $28.8 billion and $31.5 billion, respectively.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 215\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nSecurities Available for Sale in a Loss Position\nThe following table summarizes the fair value and gross unrealized losses on our available for sale securities, aggregated by major investment category and length of time that individual securities have been in a continuous unrealized loss position(a):\n(a) As a result of the adoption of the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Standard on January 1, 2018, equity securities are no longer classified and accounted for as available for sale securities.\nAt December 31, 2018, we held 16,876 individual fixed maturity securities that were in an unrealized loss position, of which 5,127 individual fixed maturity securities were in a continuous unrealized loss position for 12 months or more. We did not recognize the unrealized losses in earnings on these fixed maturity securities at December 31, 2018 because we neither intend to sell the securities nor do we believe that it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell these securities before recovery of their amortized cost basis. For fixed maturity securities with significant declines, we performed fundamental credit analyses on a security-by-security basis, which included consideration of credit enhancements, expected defaults on underlying collateral, review of relevant industry analyst reports and forecasts and other available market data.\n216 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nContractual Maturities of Fixed Maturity Securities Available for Sale\nThe following table presents the amortized cost and fair value of fixed maturity securities available for sale by contractual maturity:\nActual maturities may differ from contractual maturities because certain borrowers have the right to call or prepay certain obligations with or without call or prepayment penalties.\nThe following table presents the gross realized gains and gross realized losses from sales or maturities of our available for sale securities:\nFor the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, the aggregate fair value of available for sale securities sold was $25.1 billion, $31.3 billion and $30.2 billion, which resulted in net realized capital gains (losses) of $(129) million, $0.5 billion and $1.1 billion, respectively.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 217\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nOther Securities Measured at Fair Value\nThe following table presents the fair value of other securities measured at fair value based on our election of the fair value option:\n* Includes $178 million and $251 million of U.S. government agency backed ABS at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nOther Invested Assets\nThe following table summarizes the carrying amounts of other invested assets:\n(a) At December 31, 2018, included hedge funds of $4.2 billion, private equity funds of $4.3 billion, and affordable housing partnerships of $438 million. At December 31, 2017, included hedge funds of $5.8 billion, private equity funds of $5.0 billion, and affordable housing partnerships of $543 million.\n(b) At December 31, 2018, approximately 74 percent of our hedge fund portfolio is available for redemption in 2019. The remaining 26 percent will be available for redemption between 2020 and 2027.\n(c) Net of accumulated depreciation of $598 million and $515 million in 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nOther Invested Assets Carried at Fair Value\nCertain hedge funds, private equity funds, and other investment partnerships for which we have elected the fair value option are reported at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in Net investment income with the exception of investments of AIG’s Other Operations, for which such changes are reported in Other income.\nPrior to January 1, 2018, other investments in hedge funds, private equity funds and other investment partnerships in which our insurance operations do not hold aggregate interests sufficient to exercise more than minor influence over the respective partnerships were reported at fair value with changes in fair value recognized as a component of Accumulated other comprehensive income. These investments were subject to other-than-temporary impairment evaluations. The gross unrealized loss recorded in Accumulated other comprehensive income on such investments was $45 million at December 31, 2017, the majority of which pertained to investments in private equity funds and hedge funds that have been in continuous unrealized loss positions for less than 12 months. Effective January 1, 2018, upon the adoption of the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement standard, these investments are no longer accounted for as available for sale securities. The new standard requires these investments to be measured at fair value with the change in fair value recognized in earnings. As a result, beginning in 2018, these investments are no longer subject to the other-than-temporary impairment evaluation.\n218 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nOther Invested Assets - Equity Method Investments\nWe account for hedge funds, private equity funds, affordable housing partnerships and other investment partnerships using the equity method of accounting unless our interest is so minor that we may have virtually no influence over partnership operating and financial policies, or we have elected the fair value option. Under the equity method of accounting, our carrying amount generally is our share of the net asset value of the funds or the partnerships, and changes in our share of the net asset values are recorded in Net investment income with the exception of investments of AIG’s Other Operations, for which such changes are reported in Other income. In applying the equity method of accounting, we consistently use the most recently available financial information provided by the general partner or manager of each of these investments, which is one to three months prior to the end of our reporting period. The financial statements of these investees are generally audited annually.\nSummarized Financial Information of Equity Method Investees\nThe following is the aggregated summarized financial information of our equity method investees, including those for which the fair value option has been elected:\nThe following table presents the carrying amount and ownership percentage of equity method investments at December 31, 2018 and 2017:\nSummarized financial information for these equity method investees may be presented on a lag, due to the unavailability of information for the investees at our respective balance sheet dates, and is included for the periods in which we held an equity method ownership interest.\nOther Investments\nAlso included in Other invested assets are real estate held for investment. These investments are reported at cost, less depreciation and are subject to impairment review, as discussed below.\nInvestments in Life Settlements\nInvestments in life settlements were accounted for under the investment method. Under the investment method, we recognized our initial investment in life settlements at the transaction price plus all initial direct external costs. Continuing costs to keep the policy in force, primarily life insurance premiums, increased the carrying amount of the investment. We recognized income on individual investments in life settlements upon the death of the insured, at an amount equal to the excess of the investment proceeds over the carrying amount of the investment at that time. These investments were subject to impairment review, as discussed below.\nDuring 2017 and 2016, income recognized on investments in life settlements was $266 million and $453 million, respectively, and is included in Net investment income in the Consolidated Statements of Income. We sold the remaining portion of our life settlements portfolio in 2017.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 219\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nNet Investment Income\nNet investment income represents income primarily from the following sources:\n• Interest income and related expenses, including amortization of premiums and accretion of discounts with changes in the timing and the amount of expected principal and interest cash flows reflected in yield, as applicable.\n• Dividend income from common and preferred stocks.\n• Realized and unrealized gains and losses from investments in other securities and investments for which we elected the fair value option.\n• Earnings from alternative investments.\n• The difference between the carrying amount of an investment in life settlements and the life insurance proceeds of the underlying life insurance policy recorded in income upon the death of the insured.\nThe following table presents the components of Net investment income:\n(a) Upon the adoption of the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Standard on January 1, 2018, the change in fair value of all equity securities is included in Net investment income.\n(b) Includes income from hedge funds, private equity funds and affordable housing partnerships. Hedge funds for which we elected the fair value option are recorded as of the balance sheet date. Other hedge funds are generally reported on a one-month lag. Private equity funds are generally reported on a one-quarter lag.\nNet Realized Capital Gains and Losses\nNet realized capital gains and losses are determined by specific identification. The net realized capital gains and losses are generated primarily from the following sources:\n• Sales or full redemptions of available for sale fixed maturity securities, available for sale equity securities, real estate and other alternative investments.\n• Reductions to the amortized cost basis of available for sale fixed maturity securities, available for sale equity securities and certain other invested assets for other-than-temporary impairments.\n• Impairments on investments in life settlements.\n• Changes in fair value of derivatives except for (1) those derivatives at AIGFP and (2) those instruments that are designated as hedging instruments when the change in the fair value of the hedged item is not reported in Net realized capital gains (losses).\n• Exchange gains and losses resulting from foreign currency transactions.\n220 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nThe following table presents the components of Net realized capital losses:\n(a) In 2016, includes realized gains on the sale of a portion of our holdings in People’s Insurance Company (Group) of China Limited and PICC Property & Casualty Company Limited (collectively, our PICC Investment).\n(b) In 2018, primarily includes $96 million and $49 million of realized gains on the sale of shares of OneMain Holdings, Inc. and an investment in Castle Holdings LLC’s aircraft assets, respectively. In 2016, primarily includes $107 million of realized gains due to a purchase price adjustment on the sale of Class B shares of Prudential Financial, Inc. and losses of $253 million from the sale of a portion of our Life Settlements portfolio.\nChange in Unrealized Appreciation (Depreciation) of Investments\nThe following table presents the increase (decrease) in unrealized appreciation (depreciation) of our available for sale securities and other investments:\n(a) As a result of the adoption of the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement Standard on January 1, 2018, equity securities are no longer classified and accounted for as available for sale securities.\n(b) Excludes net unrealized losses attributable to businesses held for sale.\nThe following table summarizes the unrealized gains and losses recognized during the reporting period on equity securities still held at the reporting date:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 221\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nEvaluating Investments for Other-Than-Temporary Impairments\nFixed Maturity Securities\nIf we intend to sell a fixed maturity security or it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell a fixed maturity security before recovery of its amortized cost basis and the fair value of the security is below amortized cost, an other-than-temporary impairment has occurred and the amortized cost is written down to current fair value, with a corresponding charge to realized capital losses. When assessing our intent to sell a fixed maturity security, or whether it is more likely than not that we will be required to sell a fixed maturity security before recovery of its amortized cost basis, management evaluates relevant facts and circumstances including, but not limited to, decisions to reposition our investment portfolio, sales of securities to meet cash flow needs and sales of securities to take advantage of favorable pricing.\nFor fixed maturity securities for which a credit impairment has occurred, the amortized cost is written down to the estimated recoverable value with a corresponding charge to realized capital losses. The estimated recoverable value is the present value of cash flows expected to be collected, as determined by management. The difference between fair value and amortized cost that is not related to a credit impairment is presented in unrealized appreciation (depreciation) of fixed maturity securities on which other-than-temporary credit impairments were recognized (a separate component of accumulated other comprehensive income).\nWhen estimating future cash flows for structured fixed maturity securities (e.g., RMBS, CMBS, CDO, ABS) management considers historical performance of underlying assets and available market information as well as bond-specific structural considerations, such as credit enhancement and priority of payment structure of the security. In addition, the process of estimating future cash flows includes, but is not limited to, the following critical inputs, which vary by asset class:\n• Current delinquency rates;\n• Expected default rates and the timing of such defaults;\n• Loss severity and the timing of any recovery; and\n• Expected prepayment speeds.\nFor corporate, municipal and sovereign fixed maturity securities determined to be credit impaired, management considers the fair value as the recoverable value when available information does not indicate that another value is more relevant or reliable. When management identifies information that supports a recoverable value other than the fair value, the determination of a recoverable value considers scenarios specific to the issuer and the security, and may be based upon estimates of outcomes of corporate restructurings, political and macroeconomic factors, stability and financial strength of the issuer, the value of any secondary sources of repayment and the disposition of assets.\nWe consider severe price declines in our assessment of potential credit impairments. We may also modify our model inputs when we determine that price movements in certain sectors are indicative of factors not captured by the cash flow models.\nIn periods subsequent to the recognition of an other-than-temporary impairment charge for available for sale fixed maturity securities that is not foreign exchange related, we prospectively accrete into earnings the difference between the new amortized cost and the expected undiscounted recoverable value over the remaining expected holding period of the security.\n222 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nCredit Impairments\nThe following table presents a rollforward of the cumulative credit losses in other-than-temporary impairments recognized in earnings for available for sale fixed maturity securities:\n* Represents both accretion recognized due to changes in cash flows expected to be collected over the remaining expected term of the credit impaired securities and the accretion due to the passage of time.\nEquity Securities\nOn January 1, 2018, AIG adopted the Financial Instruments Recognition and Measurement standard for equity securities. The new standard requires equity securities to be measured at fair value with changes in fair value recognized in earnings each reporting period. As a result of the new standard, equity securities with readily determinable fair values are no longer required to be evaluated for other-than-temporary-impairment.\nPrior to the adoption of the Recognition and Measurement standard on January 1, 2018, we evaluated our available for sale equity securities for impairment by considering such securities as candidates for other-than-temporary impairment if they meet any of the following criteria:\n• The security has traded at a significant (25 percent or more) discount to cost for an extended period of time (nine consecutive months or longer);\n• A discrete credit event has occurred resulting in (i) the issuer defaulting on a material outstanding obligation; (ii) the issuer seeking protection from creditors under the bankruptcy laws or any similar laws intended for court-supervised reorganization of insolvent enterprises; or (iii) the issuer proposing a voluntary reorganization pursuant to which creditors are asked to exchange their claims for cash or securities having a fair value substantially lower than the par value of their claims; or\n• We have concluded that we may not realize a full recovery on our investment, regardless of the occurrence of one of the foregoing events.\nThe determination that an equity security was other-than-temporarily impaired required the judgment of management and consideration of the fundamental condition of the issuer, its near-term prospects and all the relevant facts and circumstances. In addition to the above criteria, all equity securities that have been in a continuous decline in value below cost over 12 months are impaired. We also considered circumstances of a rapid and severe market valuation decline (50 percent or more) discount to cost, in which we could not reasonably assert that the impairment period would be temporary (severity losses).\nOther Invested Assets\nOur equity method investments in private equity funds, hedge funds and other entities are evaluated for impairment each reporting period. Such evaluation considers market conditions, events and volatility that may impact the recoverability of the underlying investments within these private equity funds and hedge funds and is based on the nature of the underlying investments and specific inherent risks. Such risks may evolve based on the nature of the underlying investments.\nOur investments in life settlements were monitored for impairment on a contract-by-contract basis quarterly. An investment in life settlements was considered impaired if the undiscounted cash flows resulting from the expected proceeds would not be sufficient to recover our estimated future carrying amount, which was the current carrying amount for the investment in life settlements plus anticipated undiscounted future premiums and other capitalizable future costs, if any. Impaired investments in life settlements were written down to their estimated fair value which was determined on a discounted cash flow basis, incorporating current market mortality assumptions and market yields or by repricing to the anticipated sale price as appropriate.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 223\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nIn general, fair value estimates for the investments in life settlements were calculated using cash flows based on medical underwriting ratings of the policies from a third-party underwriter, applied to an industry mortality table. Our mortality assumptions were based on an industry table as supplemented with proprietary data on the older age mortality of U.S. insured lives. Mortality improvement factors were applied to these assumptions based on our view of future mortality improvements likely to apply to the U.S. insured lives population. Our mortality assumptions coupled with the mortality improvement rates were used in our estimate of future net cash flows from the investments in life settlements. We sold the remaining portion of our life settlements portfolio in 2017.\nOur investments in aircraft assets and real estate are periodically evaluated for recoverability whenever changes in circumstances indicate the carrying amount of an asset may be impaired. When impairment indicators are present, we compare expected investment cash flows to carrying amount. When the expected cash flows are less than the carrying amount, the investments are written down to fair value with a corresponding charge to earnings. We sold the remaining portion of our aircraft assets in 2018.\nPurchased Credit Impaired (PCI) Securities\nWe purchase certain RMBS securities that have experienced deterioration in credit quality since their issuance. We determine whether it is probable at acquisition that we will not collect all contractually required payments for these PCI securities, including both principal and interest. At acquisition, the timing and amount of the undiscounted future cash flows expected to be received on each PCI security is determined based on our best estimate using key assumptions, such as interest rates, default rates and prepayment speeds. At acquisition, the difference between the undiscounted expected future cash flows of the PCI securities and the recorded investment in the securities represents the initial accretable yield, which is accreted into Net investment income over their remaining lives on an effective yield basis. Additionally, the difference between the contractually required payments on the PCI securities and the undiscounted expected future cash flows represents the non-accretable difference at acquisition. The accretable yield and the non-accretable difference will change over time, based on actual payments received and changes in estimates of undiscounted expected future cash flows, which are discussed further below.\nOn a quarterly basis, the undiscounted expected future cash flows associated with PCI securities are re-evaluated based on updates to key assumptions. Declines in undiscounted expected future cash flows due to further credit deterioration as well as changes in the expected timing of the cash flows can result in the recognition of an other-than-temporary impairment charge, as PCI securities are subject to our policy for evaluating investments for other-than-temporary impairment. Changes to undiscounted expected future cash flows due solely to the changes in the contractual benchmark interest rates on variable rate PCI securities will change the accretable yield prospectively. Significant increases in undiscounted expected future cash flows for reasons other than interest rate changes are recognized prospectively as adjustments to the accretable yield.\nThe following tables present information on our PCI securities, which are included in bonds available for sale:\n* Represents undiscounted expected cash flows, including both principal and interest.\nThe following table presents activity for the accretable yield on PCI securities:\n224 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nPledged Investments\nSecured Financing and Similar Arrangements\nWe enter into secured financing transactions whereby certain securities are sold under agreements to repurchase (repurchase agreements), in which we transfer securities in exchange for cash, with an agreement by us to repurchase the same or substantially similar securities. Our secured financing transactions also include those that involve the transfer of securities to financial institutions in exchange for cash (securities lending agreements). In all of these secured financing transactions, the securities transferred by us (pledged collateral) may be sold or repledged by the counterparties. These agreements are recorded at their contracted amounts plus accrued interest, other than those that are accounted for at fair value.\nPledged collateral levels are monitored daily and are generally maintained at an agreed-upon percentage of the fair value of the amounts borrowed during the life of the transactions. In the event of a decline in the fair value of the pledged collateral under these secured financing transactions, we may be required to transfer cash or additional securities as pledged collateral under these agreements. At the termination of the transactions, we and our counterparties are obligated to return the amounts borrowed and the securities transferred, respectively.\nThe following table presents the fair value of securities pledged to counterparties under secured financing transactions, including repurchase and securities lending agreements:\nAt December 31, 2018 and 2017, amounts borrowed under repurchase and securities lending agreements totaled $1.2 billion and $4.5 billion, respectively.\nThe following table presents the fair value of securities pledged under our repurchase agreements by collateral type and by remaining contractual maturity:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 225\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nThe following table presents the fair value of securities pledged under our securities lending agreements by collateral type and by remaining contractual maturity:\nWe also enter into agreements in which securities are purchased by us under agreements to resell (reverse repurchase agreements), which are accounted for as secured financing transactions and reported as short-term investments or other assets, depending on their terms. These agreements are recorded at their contracted resale amounts plus accrued interest, other than those that are accounted for at fair value. In all reverse repurchase transactions, we take possession of or obtain a security interest in the related securities, and we have the right to sell or repledge this collateral received.\nThe following table presents information on the fair value of securities pledged to us under reverse repurchase agreements:\nAt December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017, amounts loaned under reverse repurchase agreements totaled $426 million and $2.2 billion, respectively.\nWe do not currently offset any secured financing transactions. All such transactions are collateralized and margined daily consistent with market standards and subject to enforceable master netting arrangements with rights of set off.\nInsurance - Statutory and Other Deposits\nThe total carrying value of cash and securities deposited by our insurance subsidiaries under requirements of regulatory authorities or other insurance-related arrangements, including certain annuity-related obligations and certain reinsurance treaties, was $7.9 billion and $4.9 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n226 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 6. Investments\nOther Pledges and Restrictions\nCertain of our subsidiaries are members of Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs) and such membership requires the members to own stock in these FHLBs. We owned an aggregate of $202 million and $93 million of stock in FHLBs at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. In addition, our subsidiaries have pledged securities available for sale and residential loans associated with borrowings and funding agreements from FHLBs, with a fair value of $4.2 billion and $2.1 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2018 and $2.7 billion and $471 million, respectively, at December 31, 2017.\nCertain GIAs have provisions that require collateral to be posted or payments to be made by us upon a downgrade of our long-term debt ratings. The actual amount of collateral required to be posted to the counterparties in the event of such downgrades, and the aggregate amount of payments that we could be required to make, depend on market conditions, the fair value of outstanding affected transactions and other factors prevailing at and after the time of the downgrade. The fair value of securities pledged as collateral with respect to these obligations was approximately $1.6 billion and $2.0 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. This collateral primarily consists of securities of the U.S. government and government- sponsored entities and generally cannot be repledged or resold by the counterparties.\nInvestments held in escrow accounts or otherwise subject to restriction as to their use were $273 million and $255 million, comprised of bonds available for sale and short term investments at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n7. Lending Activities\nMortgage and other loans receivable include commercial mortgages, residential mortgages, life insurance policy loans, commercial loans, and other loans and notes receivable. Commercial mortgages, residential mortgages, commercial loans, and other loans and notes receivable are carried at unpaid principal balances less allowance for credit losses and plus or minus adjustments for the accretion or amortization of discount or premium. Interest income on such loans is accrued as earned.\nDirect costs of originating commercial mortgages, commercial loans, and other loans and notes receivable, net of nonrefundable points and fees, are deferred and included in the carrying amount of the related receivables. The amount deferred is amortized to income as an adjustment to earnings using the interest method. Premiums and discounts on purchased residential mortgages are also amortized to income as an adjustment to earnings using the interest method.\nLife insurance policy loans are carried at unpaid principal balances. There is no allowance for policy loans because these loans serve to reduce the death benefit paid when the death claim is made and the balances are effectively collateralized by the cash surrender value of the policy.\nThe following table presents the composition of Mortgage and other loans receivable, net:\n* Commercial mortgages primarily represent loans for apartments, offices and retail properties, with exposures in New York and California representing the largest geographic concentrations (aggregating approximately 22 percent and 11 percent, respectively, at December 31, 2018, and 23 percent and 12 percent, respectively, at December 31, 2017).\nNonperforming loans are generally those loans where payment of contractual principal or interest is more than 90 days past due. Nonperforming mortgages were not significant for all periods presented.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 227\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 7. Lending Activities\nCredit Quality of Commercial Mortgages\nThe following table presents debt service coverage ratios and loan-to-value ratios for commercial mortgages:\n(a) The debt service coverage ratio compares a property’s net operating income to its debt service payments, including principal and interest. Our weighted average debt service coverage ratio was 1.9X and 2.1X at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n(b) The loan-to-value ratio compares the current unpaid principal balance of the loan to the estimated fair value of the underlying property collateralizing the loan. Our weighted average loan-to-value ratio was 58 percent and 57 percent at December 31, 2018, and 2017, respectively.\nThe following table presents the credit quality performance indicators for commercial mortgages:\n228 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 7. Lending Activities\n(a) Loans that have been modified in troubled debt restructurings and are performing according to their restructured terms. For additional discussion of troubled debt restructurings see below.\n(b) Does not reflect allowance for credit losses.\n(c) Our commercial mortgage loan portfolio is current as to payments of principal and interest, for both periods presented. There were no significant amounts of nonperforming commercial mortgages (defined as those loans where payment of contractual principal or interest is more than 90 days past due) during any of the periods presented.\nMethodology Used to Estimate the Allowance for Credit Losses\nMortgage and other loans receivable are considered impaired when collection of all amounts due under contractual terms is not probable. Impairment is measured using either i) the present value of expected future cash flows discounted at the loan’s effective interest rate, ii) the loan’s observable market price, if available, or iii) the fair value of the collateral if the loan is collateral dependent. Impairment of commercial mortgages is typically determined using the fair value of collateral while impairment of other loans is typically determined using the present value of cash flows or the loan’s observable market price. An allowance is typically established for the difference between the impaired value of the loan and its current carrying amount. Additional allowance amounts are established for incurred but not specifically identified impairments, based on statistical models primarily driven by past due status, debt service coverage, loan-to-value ratio, property type and location, loan term, profile of the borrower and of the major property tenants, and loan seasoning. When all or a portion of a loan is deemed uncollectible, the uncollectible portion of the carrying amount of the loan is charged off against the allowance.\nInterest income is not accrued when payment of contractual principal and interest is not expected. Any cash received on impaired loans is generally recorded as a reduction of the current carrying amount of the loan. Accrual of interest income is generally resumed when delinquent contractual principal and interest is repaid or when a portion of the delinquent contractual payments are made and the ongoing required contractual payments have been made for an appropriate period.\nA significant majority of commercial mortgages in the portfolio are non-recourse loans and, accordingly, the only guarantees are for specific items that are exceptions to the non-recourse provisions. It is therefore extremely rare for us to have cause to enforce the provisions of a guarantee on a commercial real estate or mortgage loan.\nThe following table presents a rollforward of the changes in the allowance for losses on Mortgage and other loans receivable:\n* Of the total allowance at the end of the year, $3 million, $5 million and $11 million relates to individually assessed credit losses on $54 million, $82 million and $280 million of commercial mortgages as of December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.\nTroubled Debt Restructurings\nWe modify loans to optimize their returns and improve their collectability, among other things. When we undertake such a modification with a borrower that is experiencing financial difficulty and the modification involves us granting a concession to the troubled debtor, the modification is a troubled debt restructuring (TDR). We assess whether a borrower is experiencing financial difficulty based on a variety of factors, including the borrower’s current default on any of its outstanding debt, the probability of a default on any of its debt in the foreseeable future without the modification, the insufficiency of the borrower’s forecasted cash flows to service any of its outstanding debt (including both principal and interest), and the borrower’s inability to access alternative third-party financing at an interest rate that would be reflective of current market conditions for a non-troubled debtor. Concessions granted may include extended maturity dates, interest rate changes, principal or interest forgiveness, payment deferrals and easing of loan covenants.\nLoans that had been modified in TDRs during the year ended December 31, 2018 have been fully paid off. During the year ended December 31, 2017, loans with a carrying value of $237 million were modified in troubled debt restructurings.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 229\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 8. Reinsurance\n8. Reinsurance\nIn the ordinary course of business, our insurance companies may use both treaty and facultative reinsurance to minimize their net loss exposure to any single catastrophic loss event or to an accumulation of losses from a number of smaller events or to provide greater diversification of our businesses. In addition, our general insurance subsidiaries assume reinsurance from other insurance companies. We determine the portion of the incurred but not reported (IBNR) loss that will be recoverable under our reinsurance contracts by reference to the terms of the reinsurance protection purchased. This determination is necessarily based on the estimate of IBNR and accordingly, is subject to the same uncertainties as the estimate of IBNR. Reinsurance assets include the balances due from reinsurance and insurance companies under the terms of our reinsurance agreements for paid and unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred, ceded unearned premiums and ceded future policy benefits for life and accident and health insurance contracts and benefits paid and unpaid. Amounts related to paid and unpaid losses and benefits and loss expenses with respect to these reinsurance agreements are substantially collateralized. We remain liable to the extent that our reinsurers do not meet their obligation under the reinsurance contracts, and as such, we regularly evaluate the financial condition of our reinsurers and monitor concentration of our credit risk. The estimation of the allowance for doubtful accounts requires judgment for which key inputs typically include historical trends regarding uncollectible balances, disputes and credit events as well as specific reviews of balances in dispute or subject to credit impairment. The allowance for doubtful accounts on reinsurance assets was $140 million and $187 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. Changes in the allowance for doubtful accounts on reinsurance assets are reflected in Policyholder benefits and losses incurred within the Consolidated Statements of Income.\nThe following table provides supplemental information for loss and benefit reserves, gross and net of ceded reinsurance:\n(a) Represents gross reinsurance assets, excluding allowances and reinsurance recoverable on paid losses.\nShort-Duration Reinsurance\nShort-duration reinsurance is effected under reinsurance treaties and by negotiation on individual risks. Certain of these reinsurance arrangements consist of excess of loss contracts that protect us against losses above stipulated amounts. Ceded premiums are considered prepaid reinsurance premiums and are recognized as a reduction of premiums earned over the contract period in proportion to the protection received. Amounts recoverable from reinsurers on short-duration contracts are estimated in a manner consistent with the claims liabilities associated with the reinsurance and presented as a component of Reinsurance assets. Reinsurance premiums for assumed business are estimated based on information received from brokers, ceding companies and reinsurers. Any subsequent differences arising on such estimates are recorded in the periods in which they are determined. Assumed reinsurance premiums are earned primarily on a pro-rata basis over the terms of the reinsurance contracts and the portion of premiums relating to the unexpired terms of coverage is included in the reserve for unearned premiums. Reinsurance premiums for assumed business are estimated based on information received from brokers, ceding companies and reinsureds. Any subsequent differences arising on such estimates are recorded in the periods in which they are determined. For both ceded and assumed reinsurance, risk transfer requirements must be met for reinsurance accounting to apply. If risk transfer requirements are not met, the contract is accounted for as a deposit, resulting in the recognition of cash flows under the contract through a deposit asset or liability and not as revenue or expense. To meet risk transfer requirements, a reinsurance contract must include both insurance risk, consisting of both underwriting and timing risk, and a reasonable possibility of a significant loss for the assuming entity. Similar risk transfer criteria are used to determine whether directly written insurance contracts should be accounted for as insurance or as a deposit.\n230 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 8. Reinsurance\nThe following table presents short-duration insurance premiums written and earned:\nFor the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, reinsurance recoveries, which reduced losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred, amounted to $9.8 billion, $1.5 billion and $2.1 billion, respectively.\nRetroactive reinsurance agreements are reinsurance agreements under which our reinsurer agrees to reimburse us as a result of past insurable events. For these agreements, the excess of the amounts ultimately collectible under the agreement over the consideration paid is recognized as a deferred gain liability and amortized into income over the settlement period of the ceded reserves. The amount of the deferral is recalculated each period based on loss payments and updated estimates. If the consideration paid exceeds the ultimate losses collectible under the agreement, the net loss on the agreement is recognized in income immediately. Ceded loss reserves under retroactive agreements were $13.8 billion and $13.4 billion, and the deferred gain liability was $1.8 billion and $1.6 billion, as of December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The effect on income from amortization of the deferred gain was $394 million, $316 million and $30 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016, respectively.\nIn the first quarter of 2017, we entered into an adverse development reinsurance agreement with NICO, under which we transferred to NICO 80 percent of the reserve risk on substantially all of our U.S. Commercial long-tail exposures for accident years 2015 and prior. Under this agreement, we ceded to NICO 80 percent of the losses on subject business paid on or after January 1, 2016 in excess of $25 billion of net paid losses, up to an aggregate limit of $25 billion. We account for this transaction as retroactive reinsurance. This transaction resulted in a gain, which under U.S. GAAP retroactive reinsurance accounting is deferred and amortized into income over the settlement period. NICO created a collateral trust account as security for their claim payment obligations to us, into which they deposited the consideration paid under the agreement, and Berkshire Hathaway Inc. has provided a parental guarantee to secure NICO’s obligations under the agreement.\nLong-Duration Reinsurance\nLong-duration reinsurance is effected principally under yearly renewable term treaties. The premiums with respect to these treaties are earned over the contract period in proportion to the protection provided. Amounts recoverable from reinsurers on long-duration contracts are estimated in a manner consistent with the assumptions used for the underlying policy benefits and are presented as a component of Reinsurance assets.\nThe following table presents premiums for our long-duration life insurance and annuity operations:\nLong-duration reinsurance recoveries, which reduced Policyholder benefits and losses incurred, was $778 million for the year ended December 31, 2018 and approximately $1.0 billion for both the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016.\nThe following table presents long-duration insurance in-force ceded to other insurance companies:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 231\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 8. Reinsurance\nLong-duration insurance in-force assumed as a percentage of gross long-duration insurance in-force was 0.03 percent at December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016; and premiums assumed represented 10 percent, 5 percent and 3 percent of gross premiums for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.\nThe U.S. Life and Retirement companies manage the capital impact of their statutory reserve requirements, including those resulting from the NAIC Model Regulation “Valuation of Life Insurance Policies” (Regulation XXX) and NAIC Actuarial Guideline 38 (Guideline AXXX), through unaffiliated and affiliated reinsurance transactions. Effective July 1, 2016, one of the U.S. Life and Retirement companies entered into an agreement to cede approximately $5 billion of statutory reserves for certain whole life and universal life policies to an unaffiliated reinsurer. Effective December 31, 2016, the same life insurance subsidiary recaptured term and universal life reserves subject to Regulation XXX and Guideline AXXX, previously ceded to an affiliate, and ceded approximately $14 billion of such statutory reserves to an unaffiliated reinsurer under an amendment to the July 1, 2016 agreement. Under GAAP, these unaffiliated reinsurance transactions use deposit accounting with a reinsurance risk charge recorded in income, whereas such affiliated transactions are eliminated in consolidation. Under one affiliated reinsurance arrangement, one of the U.S. Life and Retirement companies obtains letters of credit to support statutory recognition of the ceded reinsurance. As of December 31, 2018, this subsidiary had two bilateral letters of credit totaling $450 million, which were issued on February 7, 2014 and expire on February 7, 2022. The letters of credit are subject to reimbursement by AIG Parent in the event of a drawdown.\nFor additional information on the use of affiliated reinsurance for Regulation XXX and Guideline AXXX reserves see Note 19.\nReinsurance Security\nOur third-party reinsurance arrangements do not relieve us from our direct obligations to our beneficiaries. Thus, a credit exposure exists with respect to both short-duration and long-duration reinsurance ceded to the extent that any reinsurer fails to meet the obligations assumed under any reinsurance agreement. We hold substantial collateral as security under related reinsurance agreements in the form of funds, securities, and/or letters of credit. A provision has been recorded for estimated unrecoverable reinsurance. We believe that no exposure to a single reinsurer represents an inappropriate concentration of credit risk to AIG. Gross reinsurance assets due from reinsurers exceeding 5 percent of our total reinsurance assets were approximately $18.9 billion and $18.0 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, of which approximately $3.7 billion and $7.6 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, was not secured by collateral.\n9. Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs\nDeferred policy acquisition costs (DAC) represent those costs that are incremental and directly related to the successful acquisition of new or renewal of existing insurance contracts. We defer incremental costs that result directly from, and are essential to, the acquisition or renewal of an insurance contract. Such deferred policy acquisition costs generally include agent or broker commissions and bonuses, premium taxes, and medical and inspection fees that would not have been incurred if the insurance contract had not been acquired or renewed. Each cost is analyzed to assess whether it is fully deferrable. We partially defer costs, including certain commissions, when we do not believe that the entire cost is directly related to the acquisition or renewal of insurance contracts.\nWe also defer a portion of employee total compensation and payroll-related fringe benefits directly related to time spent performing specific acquisition or renewal activities, including costs associated with the time spent on underwriting, policy issuance and processing, and sales force contract selling. The amounts deferred are derived based on successful efforts for each distribution channel and/or cost center from which the cost originates.\nShort-duration insurance contracts: Policy acquisition costs are deferred and amortized over the period in which the related premiums written are earned, generally 12 months. DAC is grouped consistent with the manner in which the insurance contracts are acquired, serviced and measured for profitability and is reviewed for recoverability based on the profitability of the underlying insurance contracts. Investment income is anticipated in assessing the recoverability of DAC. We assess the recoverability of DAC on an annual basis or more frequently if circumstances indicate an impairment may have occurred. This assessment is performed by comparing recorded net unearned premiums and anticipated investment income on in-force business to the sum of expected losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred, unamortized DAC and maintenance costs. If the sum of these costs exceeds the amount of recorded net unearned premiums and anticipated investment income, the excess is recognized as an offset against the asset established for DAC. This offset is referred to as a premium deficiency charge. Increases in expected losses and loss adjustment expenses incurred can have a significant impact on the likelihood and amount of a premium deficiency charge.\n232 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 9. Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs\nLong-duration insurance contracts: Policy acquisition costs for participating life, traditional life and accident and health insurance products are generally deferred and amortized, with interest, over the premium paying period. The assumptions used to calculate the benefit liabilities and DAC for these traditional products are set when a policy is issued and do not change with changes in actual experience, unless a loss recognition event occurs. These “locked-in” assumptions include mortality, morbidity, persistency, maintenance expenses and investment returns, and include margins for adverse deviation to reflect uncertainty given that actual experience might deviate from these assumptions. A loss recognition event occurs when there is a shortfall between the carrying amount of future policy benefit liabilities, net of DAC, and what the future policy benefit liabilities, net of DAC, would be when applying updated current assumptions. When we determine a loss recognition event has occurred, we first reduce any DAC related to that block of business through amortization of acquisition expense, and after DAC is depleted, we record additional liabilities through a charge to Policyholder benefits and losses incurred. Groupings for loss recognition testing are consistent with our manner of acquiring, servicing and measuring the profitability of the business and applied by product groupings. We perform separate loss recognition tests for traditional life products, payout annuities and long-term care products. Once loss recognition has been recorded for a block of business, the old assumption set is replaced and the assumption set used for the loss recognition would then be subject to the lock-in principle.\nInvestment-oriented contracts: Certain policy acquisition costs and policy issuance costs related to universal life and investment-type products (collectively, investment-oriented products) are deferred and amortized, with interest, in relation to the incidence of estimated gross profits to be realized over the estimated lives of the contracts. Estimated gross profits include net investment income and spreads, net realized capital gains and losses, fees, surrender charges, expenses, and mortality gains and losses. In each reporting period, current period amortization expense is adjusted to reflect actual gross profits. If estimated gross profits change significantly, DAC is recalculated using the new assumptions, and any resulting adjustment is included in income. If the new assumptions indicate that future estimated gross profits are higher than previously estimated, DAC will be increased resulting in a decrease in amortization expense and increase in income in the current period; if future estimated gross profits are lower than previously estimated, DAC will be decreased resulting in an increase in amortization expense and decrease in income in the current period. Updating such assumptions may result in acceleration of amortization in some products and deceleration of amortization in other products. DAC is grouped consistent with the manner in which the insurance contracts are acquired, serviced and measured for profitability and is reviewed for recoverability based on the current and projected future profitability of the underlying insurance contracts.\nTo estimate future estimated gross profits for variable annuity products, a long-term annual asset growth assumption is applied to determine the future growth in assets and related asset-based fees. In determining the asset growth rate, the effect of short-term fluctuations in the equity markets is partially mitigated through the use of a “reversion to the mean” methodology whereby short-term asset growth above or below long-term annual rate assumptions impacts the growth assumption applied to the five-year period subsequent to the current balance sheet date. The reversion to the mean methodology allows us to maintain our long-term growth assumptions, while also giving consideration to the effect of actual investment performance. When actual performance significantly deviates from the annual long-term growth assumption, as evidenced by growth assumptions in the five-year reversion to the mean period falling below a certain rate (floor) or above a certain rate (cap) for a sustained period, judgment may be applied to revise or “unlock” the growth rate assumptions to be used for both the five-year reversion to the mean period as well as the long-term annual growth assumption applied to subsequent periods.\nShadow DAC and Shadow Loss Recognition: DAC related to investment-oriented products is also adjusted to reflect the effect of unrealized gains or losses on fixed maturity securities available for sale and prior to 2018, equity securities at fair value on estimated gross profits, with related changes recognized through Other comprehensive income (shadow DAC). The adjustment is made at each balance sheet date, as if the securities had been sold at their stated aggregate fair value and the proceeds reinvested at current yields. Similarly, for long-duration traditional insurance contracts, if the assets supporting the liabilities are in a net unrealized gain position at the balance sheet date, loss recognition testing assumptions are updated to exclude such gains from future cash flows by reflecting the impact of reinvestment rates on future yields. If a future loss is anticipated under this basis, any additional shortfall indicated by loss recognition tests is recognized as a reduction in accumulated other comprehensive income (shadow loss recognition). Similar to other loss recognition on long-duration insurance contracts, such shortfall is first reflected as a reduction in DAC and secondly as an increase in liabilities for future policy benefits. The change in these adjustments, net of tax, is included with the change in net unrealized appreciation of investments that is credited or charged directly to Other comprehensive income.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 233\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 9. Deferred Policy Acquisition Costs\nInternal Replacements of Long-duration and Investment-oriented Products: For some products, policyholders can elect to modify product benefits, features, rights or coverages by exchanging a contract for a new contract or by amendment, endorsement, or rider to a contract, or by the election of a feature or coverage within a contract. These transactions are known as internal replacements. If the modification does not substantially change the contract, we do not change the accounting and amortization of existing DAC and related actuarial balances. If an internal replacement represents a substantial change, the original contract is considered to be extinguished and any related DAC or other policy balances are charged or credited to income, and any new deferrable costs associated with the replacement contract are deferred.\nValue of Business Acquired (VOBA) is determined at the time of acquisition and is reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheets with DAC. This value is based on the present value of future pre-tax profits discounted at yields applicable at the time of purchase. For participating life, traditional life and accident and health insurance products, VOBA is amortized over the life of the business in a manner similar to that for DAC based on the assumptions at purchase. For investment-oriented products, VOBA is amortized in relation to estimated gross profits and adjusted for the effect of unrealized gains or losses on fixed maturity securities available for sale and prior to 2018, equity securities at fair value in a manner similar to DAC.\nThe following table presents a rollforward of DAC and VOBA:\n(a) Net of reductions in DAC of $1.0 billion, $1.3 billion, and $842 million at December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively, related to the effect of net unrealized gains and losses on available for sale securities (shadow DAC).\n(b) Includes $101 million of VOBA from the acquisition of Validus, the majority of which will be amortized within the next 12 to 18 months.\nThe percentage of the unamortized balance of VOBA at December 31, 2018 expected to be amortized in 2019 through 2023 by year is: 8.6 percent, 7.7 percent, 6.7 percent, 6.3 percent and 6.0 percent, respectively, with 64.8 percent being amortized after five years. These projections are based on current estimates for investment income and spreads, persistency, mortality and morbidity assumptions.\nDAC, VOBA and SIA for insurance-oriented and investment-oriented products are reviewed for recoverability, which involves estimating the future profitability of current business. This review involves significant management judgment. If actual profitability is substantially lower than estimated, AIG’s DAC, VOBA and SIA may be subject to an impairment charge and AIG’s results of operations could be significantly affected in future periods.\n234 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 10. Variable Interest Entities\n10. Variable Interest Entities\nA variable interest entity (VIE) is a legal entity that does not have sufficient equity at risk to finance its activities without additional subordinated financial support or is structured such that equity investors lack the ability to make significant decisions relating to the entity’s operations through voting rights or do not substantively participate in the gains and losses of the entity. Consolidation of a VIE by its primary beneficiary is not based on majority voting interest, but is based on other criteria discussed below.\nWe enter into various arrangements with VIEs in the normal course of business and consolidate the VIEs when we determine we are the primary beneficiary. This analysis includes a review of the VIE’s capital structure, related contractual relationships and terms, nature of the VIE’s operations and purpose, nature of the VIE’s interests issued and our involvement with the entity. When assessing the need to consolidate a VIE, we evaluate the design of the VIE as well as the related risks the entity was designed to expose the variable interest holders to.\nThe primary beneficiary is the entity that has both (1) the power to direct the activities of the VIE that most significantly affect the entity’s economic performance and (2) the obligation to absorb losses or the right to receive benefits that could be potentially significant to the VIE. While also considering these factors, the consolidation conclusion depends on the breadth of our decision-making ability and our ability to influence activities that significantly affect the economic performance of the VIE.\nBalance Sheet Classification and Exposure to Loss\nThe following table presents the total assets and total liabilities associated with our variable interests in consolidated VIEs, as classified in the Consolidated Balance Sheets:\n(a) Comprised primarily of Short-term investments and Other assets at December 31, 2018 and 2017.\n(b) The assets of each VIE can be used only to settle specific obligations of that VIE.\n(c) Comprised primarily of Other liabilities at December 31, 2018 and 2017.\n(d) At December 31, 2018 and 2017, off-balance sheet exposure primarily consisting of commitments to real estate and investment entities was $1.4 billion and $86 million, respectively.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 235\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 10. Variable Interest Entities\n(e) At December 31, 2018 and 2017, $16.0 billion and $17.6 billion, respectively, of the total assets of consolidated securitization vehicles were owed to AIG Parent or its subsidiaries.\nWe calculate our maximum exposure to loss to be (i) the amount invested in the debt or equity of the VIE, (ii) the notional amount of VIE assets or liabilities where we have also provided credit protection to the VIE with the VIE as the referenced obligation, and (iii) other commitments and guarantees to the VIE. Interest holders in VIEs sponsored by us generally have recourse only to the assets and cash flows of the VIEs and do not have recourse to us, except in limited circumstances when we have provided a guarantee to the VIE’s interest holders.\nThe following table presents total assets of unconsolidated VIEs in which we hold a variable interest, as well as our maximum exposure to loss associated with these VIEs:\n(a) Comprised primarily of hedge funds and private equity funds.\n(b) At December 31, 2018 and 2017, $7.4 billion and $9.8 billion, respectively, of our total unconsolidated VIE assets were recorded as Other invested assets.\n(c) These amounts represent our estimate of the maximum exposure to loss under certain insurance policies issued to VIEs if a hypothetical loss occurred to the extent of the full amount of the insured value. Our insurance policies cover defined risks and our estimate of liability is included in our insurance reserves on the balance sheet.\nReal Estate and Investment Entities\nThrough our insurance operations and AIG Global Real Estate, we are an investor in various real estate investment entities, some of which are VIEs. These investments are typically with unaffiliated third-party developers via a partnership or limited liability company structure. The VIEs’ activities consist of the development or redevelopment of commercial, industrial and residential real estate. Our involvement varies from being a passive equity investor or finance provider to actively managing the activities of the VIEs.\nOur insurance operations participate as passive investors in the equity issued by certain third-party-managed hedge and private equity funds that are VIEs. Our insurance operations typically are not involved in the design or establishment of these VIEs, nor do they actively participate in the management of the VIEs.\nSecuritization Vehicles\nWe created certain VIEs that hold investments, primarily in investment-grade debt securities and loans, and issued beneficial interests in these investments. The majority of these beneficial interests are owned by our insurance operations and we maintain the power to direct the activities of the VIEs that most significantly impact their economic performance and bear the obligation to absorb losses or receive benefits from the entities that could potentially be significant to the entities. Accordingly, we consolidate these entities and those beneficial interests issued to third-parties are reported as Long-term debt. Total assets of consolidated securitization vehicles are $16.9 billion, of which $16.0 billion represents amounts owed to Parent or its subsidiaries.\n236 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 10. Variable Interest Entities\nAffordable Housing Partnerships\nSunAmerica Affordable Housing Partners, Inc. (SAAHP) organized and invested in limited partnerships that develop and operate affordable housing qualifying for federal, state, and historic tax credits, in addition to a few market rate properties across the United States. The operating partnerships are VIEs, whose debt is generally non-recourse in nature, and the general partners of which are mostly unaffiliated third-party developers. We account for our investments in operating partnerships using the equity method of accounting, unless they are required to be consolidated. We consolidate an operating partnership if the general partner is an affiliated entity or we otherwise have the power to direct activities that most significantly impact the entities’ economic performance. The pre-tax income of SAAHP is reported as a component of the Life and Retirement segment.\nRMBS, CMBS, Other ABS and CDOs\nPrimarily through our insurance operations, we are a passive investor in RMBS, CMBS, other ABS and CDOs, the majority of which are issued by domestic special purpose entities. We generally do not sponsor or transfer assets to, or act as the servicer to these asset-backed structures, and were not involved in the design of these entities.\nOur maximum exposure in these types of structures is limited to our investment in securities issued by these entities. Based on the nature of our investments and our passive involvement in these types of structures, we have determined that we are not the primary beneficiary of these entities. We have not included these entities in the above tables; however, the fair values of our investments in these structures are reported in Notes 5 and 6 herein.\n11. Derivatives and Hedge Accounting\nWe use derivatives and other financial instruments as part of our financial risk management programs and as part of our investment operations. Interest rate derivatives (such as interest rate swaps) are used to manage interest rate risk associated with embedded derivatives contained in insurance contract liabilities, fixed maturity securities, outstanding medium- and long-term notes as well as other interest rate sensitive assets and liabilities. Foreign exchange derivatives (principally foreign exchange forwards and options) are used to economically mitigate risk associated with non-U.S. dollar denominated debt, net capital exposures, and foreign currency transactions. Equity derivatives are used to mitigate financial risk embedded in certain insurance liabilities. We use credit derivatives to manage our credit exposures. The derivatives are effective economic hedges of the exposures that they are meant to offset. In addition to hedging activities, we also enter into derivative instruments with respect to investment operations, which may include, among other things, CDSs and purchases of investments with embedded derivatives, such as equity-linked notes and convertible bonds.\nInterest rate, currency, equity and commodity swaps, credit contracts, swaptions, options and forward transactions are accounted for as derivatives, recorded on a trade-date basis and carried at fair value. Unrealized gains and losses are reflected in income, when appropriate. Aggregate asset or liability positions are netted on the Consolidated Balance Sheets only to the extent permitted by qualifying master netting arrangements in place with each respective counterparty. Cash collateral posted with counterparties in conjunction with transactions supported by qualifying master netting arrangements is reported as a reduction of the corresponding net derivative liability, while cash collateral received in conjunction with transactions supported by qualifying master netting arrangements is reported as a reduction of the corresponding net derivative asset.\nDerivatives, with the exception of embedded derivatives, are reported at fair value in the Consolidated Balance Sheets in Other assets and Other liabilities. Embedded derivatives are generally presented with the host contract in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. A bifurcated embedded derivative is measured at fair value and accounted for in the same manner as a free standing derivative contract. The corresponding host contract is accounted for according to the accounting guidance applicable for that instrument.\nFor additional information on embedded derivatives see Notes 5 and 14 herein.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 237\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 11. Derivatives and Hedge Accounting\nThe following table presents the notional amounts of our derivatives and the fair value of derivative assets and liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets:\n(a) Fair value amounts are shown before the effects of counterparty netting adjustments and offsetting cash collateral.\n(b) As of December 31, 2018 and 2017, included CDSs on super senior multi-sector CDOs with a net notional amount of $592 million and $685 million (fair value liability of $224 million and $254 million), respectively. The net notional amount represents the maximum exposure to loss on the portfolio. As of December 31, 2018 and 2017, there were no super senior corporate debt/CLOs remaining.\n(c) Consists primarily of stable value wraps and contracts with multiple underlying exposures.\n(d) Represents netting of derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement.\n(e) Represents cash collateral posted and received that is eligible for netting.\n(f) Freestanding derivatives only, excludes embedded derivatives. Derivative instrument assets and liabilities are recorded in Other Assets and Liabilities, respectively. Fair value of assets related to bifurcated embedded derivatives was zero at both December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017. Fair value of liabilities related to bifurcated embedded derivatives was $4.1 billion and $4.1 billion, respectively, at December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017. A bifurcated embedded derivative is generally presented with the host contract in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Embedded derivatives are primarily related to guarantee features in variable annuity products, which include equity and interest rate components.\nCollateral\nWe engage in derivative transactions that are not subject to a clearing requirement directly with unaffiliated third parties, in most cases, under International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. (ISDA) Master Agreements. Many of the ISDA Master Agreements also include Credit Support Annex (CSA) provisions, which provide for collateral postings that may vary at various ratings and threshold levels. We attempt to reduce our risk with certain counterparties by entering into agreements that enable collateral to be obtained from a counterparty on an upfront or contingent basis. We minimize the risk that counterparties might be unable to fulfill their contractual obligations by monitoring counterparty credit exposure and collateral value and generally requiring additional collateral to be posted upon the occurrence of certain events or circumstances. In addition, certain derivative transactions have provisions that require collateral to be posted upon a downgrade of our long-term debt ratings or give the counterparty the right to terminate the transaction. In the case of some of the derivative transactions, upon a downgrade of our long-term debt ratings, as an alternative to posting collateral and subject to certain conditions, we may assign the transaction to an obligor with higher debt ratings or arrange for a substitute guarantee of our obligations by an obligor with higher debt ratings or take other similar action. The actual amount of collateral required to be posted to counterparties in the event of such downgrades, or the aggregate amount of payments that we could be required to make, depends on market conditions, the fair value of outstanding affected transactions and other factors prevailing at and after the time of the downgrade.\n238 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 11. Derivatives and Hedge Accounting\nCollateral posted by us to third parties for derivative transactions was $1.7 billion and $2.9 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. In the case of collateral posted under derivative transactions that are not subject to clearing, this collateral can generally be repledged or resold by the counterparties. Collateral provided to us from third parties for derivative transactions was $2.1 billion and $1.3 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. In the case of collateral provided to us under derivative transactions that are not subject to clearing, we generally can repledge or resell collateral.\nOffsetting\nWe have elected to present all derivative receivables and derivative payables, and the related cash collateral received and paid, on a net basis on our Consolidated Balance Sheets when a legally enforceable ISDA Master Agreement exists between us and our derivative counterparty. An ISDA Master Agreement is an agreement governing multiple derivative transactions between two counterparties. The ISDA Master Agreement generally provides for the net settlement of all, or a specified group, of these derivative transactions, as well as transferred collateral, through a single payment, and in a single currency, as applicable. The net settlement provisions apply in the event of a default on, or affecting any, one derivative transaction or a termination event affecting all, or a specified group of, derivative transactions governed by the ISDA Master Agreement.\nHedge Accounting\nWe designated certain derivatives entered into with third parties as fair value hedges of available for sale investment securities held by our insurance subsidiaries. The fair value hedges include foreign currency forwards and cross currency swaps designated as hedges of the change in fair value of foreign currency denominated available for sale securities attributable to changes in foreign exchange rates. We also designated certain interest rate swaps entered into with third parties as fair value hedges of fixed rate GICs attributable to changes in benchmark interest rates.\nWe use foreign currency denominated debt and cross-currency swaps as hedging instruments in net investment hedge relationships to mitigate the foreign exchange risk associated with our non-U.S. dollar functional currency foreign subsidiaries. For net investment hedge relationships where issued debt is used as a hedging instrument, we assess the hedge effectiveness and measure the amount of ineffectiveness based on changes in spot rates. For net investment hedge relationships that use derivatives as hedging instruments, we assess hedge effectiveness and measure hedge ineffectiveness using changes in forward rates. For the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016 we recognized gains (losses) of $34 million, $(106) million and $123 million, respectively, included in Change in foreign currency translation adjustment in Other comprehensive income related to the net investment hedge relationships.\nA qualitative methodology is utilized to assess hedge effectiveness for net investment hedges, while regression analysis is employed for all other hedges.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 239\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 11. Derivatives and Hedge Accounting\nThe following table presents the gain (loss) recognized in earnings on our derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships in the Consolidated Statements of Income:\n(a) The amounts presented do not include the periodic net coupon settlements of the derivative contract or the coupon income (expense) related to the hedged item.\n(b) Represents accretion/amortization of opening fair value of the hedged item at inception of hedge relationship, amortization of basis adjustment on hedged item following the discontinuation of hedge accounting, and the release of debt basis adjustment following the repurchase of issued debt that was part of previously-discontinued fair value hedge relationship.\n240 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 11. Derivatives and Hedge Accounting\nDerivatives Not Designated as Hedging Instruments\nThe following table presents the effect of derivative instruments not designated as hedging instruments in the Consolidated Statements of Income:\nCredit Risk-Related Contingent Features\nWe estimate that at December 31, 2018, based on our outstanding financial derivative transactions, a downgrade of our long-term senior debt ratings to BBB or BBB- by Standard & Poor’s Financial Services LLC, a subsidiary of S&P Global Inc., and/or a downgrade to Baa2 or Baa3 by Moody’s Investors’ Service, Inc. would permit counterparties to make additional collateral calls and permit certain counterparties to elect early termination of contracts, resulting in corresponding collateral postings and termination payments in the total amount of up to approximately $61 million. The aggregate fair value of our derivatives that were in a net liability position and that contain such credit risk-related contingencies which can be triggered below our long-term senior debt ratings of BBB+ or Baa1 was approximately $423 million and $572 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The aggregate fair value of assets posted as collateral under these contracts at December 31, 2018 and 2017, was approximately $453 million and $676 million, respectively.\nHybrid Securities with Embedded Credit Derivatives\nWe invest in hybrid securities (such as credit-linked notes) with the intent of generating income, and not specifically to acquire exposure to embedded derivative risk. As is the case with our other investments in RMBS, CMBS, CDOs and ABS, our investments in these hybrid securities are exposed to losses only up to the amount of our initial investment in the hybrid security. Other than our initial investment in the hybrid securities, we have no further obligation to make payments on the embedded credit derivatives in the related hybrid securities.\nWe elect to account for our investments in these hybrid securities with embedded written credit derivatives at fair value, with changes in fair value recognized in Net investment income and Other income. Our investments in these hybrid securities are reported as Other bond securities in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The fair values of these hybrid securities were $3.9 billion and $4.4 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. These securities have par amounts of $8.5 billion and $9.1 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, and have remaining stated maturity dates that extend to 2052.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 241\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 12. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets\n12. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets\nGoodwill represents the future economic benefits arising from assets acquired in a business combination that are not individually identified and separately recognized. Goodwill is tested for impairment annually or more frequently if circumstances indicate an impairment may have occurred. At December 31, 2018, the operating segments with goodwill are our General Insurance business - North America and International operating segments, our Life and Retirement business - Life Insurance operating segment and our Other Operations and Legacy Portfolio operating segments. When a business is transferred from one reporting unit to another, as occurred as part of the 2017 segment changes, goodwill from the original operating segment is allocated among reporting units based on the fair value of business transferred, relative to business retained by a reporting unit.\nThe impairment assessment involves an option to first assess qualitative factors to determine whether events or circumstances exist that lead to a determination that it is more likely than not that the fair value of an operating segment is less than its carrying amount. If the qualitative assessment is not performed, or after assessing the totality of the events or circumstances, we determine it is more likely than not that the fair value of an operating segment is less than its carrying amount, the impairment assessment involves a two-step process in which a quantitative assessment for potential impairment is performed.\nIf the qualitative test is not performed or if the test indicates a potential impairment is present, we estimate the fair value of each operating segment and compare the estimated fair value with the carrying amount of the operating segment, including allocated goodwill. The estimate of an operating segment’s fair value involves management judgment and is based on one or a combination of approaches including discounted expected future cash flows, market-based earnings multiples of the unit’s peer companies, external appraisals or, in the case of reporting units being considered for sale, third-party indications of fair value, if available. We consider one or more of these estimates when determining the fair value of an operating segment to be used in the impairment test.\nIf the estimated fair value of an operating segment exceeds its carrying amount, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of an operating segment exceeds its estimated fair value, goodwill associated with that operating segment potentially is impaired. The amount of impairment, if any, is measured as the excess of the carrying value of the goodwill over the implied fair value of the goodwill. The implied fair value of the goodwill is measured as the excess of the fair value of the operating segment over the amounts that would be assigned to the operating segment’s assets and liabilities in a hypothetical business combination. An impairment charge is recognized in earnings to the extent of the excess of carrying value over fair value.\nGoodwill was not impaired at December 31, 2018 based on the results of the goodwill impairment test.\n242 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 12. Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets\nThe following table presents the changes in goodwill by operating segment:\n* Includes goodwill of $2.0 billion, $492 million and $46 million relating to the acquisitions of Validus, Glatfelter and Ellipse, respectively.\nThe following table presents the changes in other intangible assets and the value of distribution network acquired by operating segment:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 243\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\n13. Insurance Liabilities\nLiability for Unpaid Losses and Loss Adjustment Expenses (Loss Reserves)\nLoss reserves represent the accumulation of estimates of unpaid claims, including estimates for claims incurred but not reported and loss adjustment expenses (IBNR), less applicable discount. We regularly review and update the methods used to determine loss reserve estimates. Any adjustments resulting from this review are reflected currently in pre-tax income. Because these estimates are subject to the outcome of future events, changes in estimates are common given that loss trends vary and time is often required for changes in trends to be recognized and confirmed. Reserve changes that increase previous estimates of ultimate cost are referred to as unfavorable or adverse development or reserve strengthening. Reserve changes that decrease previous estimates of ultimate cost are referred to as favorable development.\nOur gross loss reserves before reinsurance and discount are net of contractual deductible recoverable amounts due from policyholders of approximately $12.3 billion and $12.6 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. These recoverable amounts are related to certain policies with high deductibles (in excess of high dollar amounts retained by the insured through self-insured retentions, deductibles, retrospective programs, or captive arrangements, each referred to generically as “deductibles”), primarily for U.S. commercial casualty business. With respect to the deductible portion of the claim, we manage and pay the entire claim on behalf of the insured and are reimbursed by the insured for the deductible portion of the claim. Thus, these recoverable amounts represent a credit exposure to us. At December 31, 2018 and 2017, we held collateral of approximately $9.2 billion and $9.5 billion, respectively, for these deductible recoverable amounts, consisting primarily of letters of credit and funded trust agreements.\nThe following table presents the roll-forward of activity in Loss Reserves:\n(a) Includes $51 million and $25 million for the retroactive reinsurance agreement with NICO covering U.S. asbestos exposures for the year ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n(b) Includes amounts related to the acquisition of Glatfelter in October 2018, Validus in July 2018 and Blackboard U.S. Holdings Inc. in 2017.\n(c) Includes amounts related to dispositions through the date of disposition. Includes sale of insurance operations to Fairfax, United Guaranty and Ascot Underwriting Holdings Limited, and Ascot Employees Corporate Member Limited (Ascot).\n(d) Includes discount on retroactive insurance in the amount of $180 million and $1.5 billion for the periods ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n244 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\n(e) Represents change in loss reserves included in our sale of certain of our insurance operations and certain assets to Fairfax for the period ended December 31, 2016. Upon consummation of the sale, we retained a portion of these reserves through reinsurance arrangements.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized adverse prior year loss reserve development of $1.4 billion before impact of the Adverse Development Cover and the asbestos cession to NICO. The key components of this development were as follows:\n• Unfavorable development in US Excess Casualty, driven by the combination of construction defect and construction wrap claims from accident year 2015 and prior where we reacted to significant increases in severity and longer claim reporting patterns, as well as higher than expected loss severity in accident years 2016 and 2017, which led to an increase in estimates for these accident years;\n• Unfavorable development in U.S. Financial Lines, primarily from Directors & Officers (D&O) and Employment Practices Liability (EPLI) policies covering Corporate and National Insureds as well as Private and Not-for-Profit insureds. This development was predominantly in accident years 2014-2017 and resulted largely from increases in severity associated with an increase in frequency of class action lawsuits from those years.\n• Favorable development in US Commercial Property and Specialty Lines due to reductions in our estimates for 2017 Catastrophes , favorable attritional losses in Commercial Property and favorable Specialty emergence.\n• Unfavorable development in US Personal Lines reflecting the adverse development on the 2017 California Wildfires and Hurricane Irma in 2017.\n• Unfavorable development in International Financial Lines driven by increased large loss activity in recent accident years, particularly related to directors and officers class action suits against insureds with global exposure.\nOur analyses and conclusions about prior year reserves also help inform our judgments about the current accident year loss and loss adjustment expense ratios we selected.\nDuring 2017, we recognized unfavorable prior year loss reserve development of $1.6 billion. This unfavorable development was primarily a result of the following:\n• Unfavorable development in U.S. Casualty lines, driven primarily by increases in underlying severity and greater than expected emerging loss experience in accident year 2016 as well as increased development from claims related to construction defects and construction wrap business (largely from accident years 2006 and prior).\n• Unfavorable development in U.S. Financial Lines, primarily from Directors & Officers (D&O) policies covering privately owned and not-for-profit insureds. This development was predominantly in accident year 2016 and resulted largely from increases in bankruptcy-related claims and fiduciary liability claims for large educational institutions.\n• Higher than expected losses for UK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines. We observed a significant increase in large claims activity in our UK/Europe long-tail business, with a large proportion emanating from accident year 2016. In addition, we increased our loss reserves as a result of the decision made by the U.K. Ministry of Justice to reduce the discount rate applied to lump-sum bodily injury payouts, known as the Ogden rate.\n• In addition we also observed higher than expected losses in UK/Europe property and special risks business driven by unexpected development on various large claims across the property, aviation, marine, and trade credit segments.\nDuring 2016, we recognized adverse prior year loss reserve development of $5.8 billion. This unfavorable development was primarily a result of the following:\n• Higher than expected losses emerging across several casualty product lines, especially in the recent accident years (generally, 2011 to 2015) driven by increased frequency and severity of claims. This recent accident year loss emergence caused us to increase loss development factors applied across many accident years.\n• Loss development factors including workers’ compensation tail factors, also increased due to an observed lengthening of loss reporting patterns relative to prior expectations.\n• Increases in loss trend assumptions to reflect the latest observed increases in frequency and severity and the impact of these increased loss trends on expected loss ratios.\n• Changes in weights we apply to the various actuarial methods to better align with updated trends.\nThe loss development tables below include loss development data by major lines of business for the last ten accident years. The drivers of prior year development are discussed following each of the loss development tables.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 245\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe table below presents the reconciliation of the net liability for unpaid losses and loss adjustment expenses in the following tables to Loss Reserves in the Consolidated Balance Sheets for the year ended December 31, 2018:\nLoss Development Information\nThe following is information about incurred and paid loss developments as of December 31, 2018, net of reinsurance. The cumulative number of reported claims, the total of IBNR liabilities and expected development on reported loss included within the net incurred loss amounts are presented in the following section.\nReserving Methodology\nWe use a combination of methods to project ultimate losses for both long-tail and short-tail exposures, which include:\n· Paid Development method: The Paid Development method estimates ultimate losses by reviewing paid loss patterns and selecting paid ultimate loss development factors. These factors are then applied to paid losses by applying them to accident years, with further expected changes in paid loss. Since the method does not rely on case reserves, it is not directly influenced by changes in the adequacy of case reserves.\n· Incurred Development method: The Incurred Development method is similar to the Paid Development method, but it uses case incurred losses instead of paid losses. Since this method uses more data (case reserves in addition to paid losses) than the Paid Development method, the incurred development patterns may be less variable than paid development patterns.\n· Expected Loss Ratio method: The Expected Loss Ratio method multiplies premiums by an expected loss ratio to produce ultimate loss estimates for each accident year. This method may be useful if loss development patterns are inconsistent, losses emerge very slowly, or there is relatively little loss history from which to estimate future losses.\n· Bornhuetter-Ferguson method: The Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and paid losses is a combination of the Paid Development method and the Expected Loss Ratio method where the weight given to each method is the reciprocal of the loss development factor. This method normally determines expected loss ratios similar to the method used for the Expected Loss Ratio method. The Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and incurred losses is similar to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method using premiums and paid losses except that it uses case-incurred losses.\n· Cape Cod method: The Cape Cod method is mechanically similar to the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method with the difference being that the Expected Loss Ratio estimates are determined based on a weighting of the loss estimates that come from the Paid/Incurred Development Methods. This method may be more responsive to recent loss trends than the Bornhuetter-Ferguson method.\n246 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\n· Average Loss method: The Average Loss method multiplies a projected number of ultimate claims by an estimated ultimate severity average loss for each accident year to produce ultimate loss estimates. Since projections of the ultimate number of claims are often less variable than projections of ultimate loss, this method can provide more reliable results for reserve categories where loss development patterns are inconsistent or too variable to be relied on exclusively.\nIn updating our loss reserve estimates, we consider and evaluate inputs from many sources, including actual claims data, the performance of prior reserve estimates, observed industry trends, our internal peer review processes, including challenges and recommendations from our Enterprise Risk Management group, as well as the views of third-party actuarial firms. We use these inputs to improve our evaluation techniques, and to analyze and assess the change in estimated ultimate loss for each accident year by product line. Our analyses produce a range of indications from various methods, from which we select our best estimate.\nIn determining the actual carried loss reserves, we consider both the internal actuarial best estimate and numerous other internal and external factors, including:\n· an assessment of economic conditions, including real GDP growth, inflation, employment rates or unemployment duration, stock market volatility and changes in corporate bond spreads;\n· changes in the legal, regulatory, judicial and social environment, including changes in road safety, public health and cleanup standards;\n· changes in medical cost trends (inflation, intensity and utilization of medical services) and wage inflation trends;\n· underlying policy pricing, terms and conditions including attachment points and policy limits;\n· change in claims handling philosophy, operating model, processes, and related ongoing enhancements;\n· third-party claims reviews that are periodically performed for key classes of claims such as toxic tort, environmental and other complex casualty claims;\n· third-party actuarial reviews that are periodically performed for key classes of business;\n· input from underwriters on pricing, terms, and conditions and market trends; and\n· changes in our reinsurance program, pricing and commutations.\nThe following factors are relevant to the loss development information Included in the tables below:\n· Table organization: The tables are organized by accident year and include policies written on an occurrence and claims- made basis. We note that for certain categories of claims (e.g., construction defect claims and environmental claims) and for reinsurance recoverable, losses may sometimes be reclassified to an earlier or later accident year as more information about the date of occurrence becomes available to us. These reclassifications are shown as development in the respective years in the tables below. Financial Lines business is primarily written on a claims-made basis, while the majority of the workers’ compensation, excess casualty, other casualty, and run-off property and casualty lines of business are written on an occurrence basis. Primarily, all short-tail lines in Property and Special Risks and Personal Insurance are written on an occurrence basis.\n· Groupings: We believe our groupings have homogenous risk characteristics with similar development patterns and would generally be subject to similar trends and reflect our reportable segments. The incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses and paid losses in the following tables for the current reporting year are allocated to the line of business and accident years based on an initial allocation methodology and updated for the final allocation in the subsequent reporting year. The difference between the initial and the final allocation does not have a material impact on the loss tables.\n· Reinsurance: Our reinsurance program varies by exposure type. Historically we have leveraged facultative and treaty reinsurance, both on a pro-rata and excess of loss basis. Our reinsurance program may change from year to year, which may affect the comparability of the data presented in our tables.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 247\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\n· Adverse Development Reinsurance Agreement: We have provided the impact of the Adverse Development Reinsurance Agreement (ADC) in an additional table below our Incurred Losses and Allocated Loss Adjustment Expenses (ALAE) tables. The impact of the ADC is shown beginning in 2016 given the retroactive date of the contract and coincides with the effective date of the contract. For the lines of business covered by the agreement (U.S. Workers\' Compensation, U.S. Excess Casualty, U.S. Other Casualty, U.S. Financial Lines, U.S. Property and Special Risks and U.S. Personal Insurance or collectively, the "Covered Lines"), an attribution of the loss recoveries to the line of business by calendar year and accident year is performed based on the underlying distribution of the losses subject to the agreement. Specifically, the future claim payments for all subject incurred losses were projected into future years based on the same actuarial assumptions underlying the related reserves. Also, refer to the additional table presented after discussion of prior year development by line of business, which reconciles the changes in net ultimates to our overall prior year development and provides the reattribution of loss recoveries for the Covered Lines. The reinsurance terms of the ADC were then used to identify the future claims payments for which 80% will be reimbursed by NICO. At each reporting period, the attribution of the ADC recoveries is performed. The factors that could cause the attribution to lines of business and accident year to change include changes in underlying actuarial assumptions as to timing and amount of future claim payments.\n· Incurred but not reported liabilities (IBNR): We include development from past reported losses in IBNR.\n· Data excluded from tables: Information with respect to accident years older than ten years is excluded from the development tables. Unallocated loss adjustment expenses are also excluded.\n· Foreign exchange: The loss development for operations outside of the U.S. is presented for all accident years using the current exchange rate at December 31, 2018. Although this approach requires restating all prior accident year information, the changes in exchange rates do not impact incurred and paid loss development trends.\n· Acquisitions: We include acquisitions from all accident years presented in the tables. For purposes of this disclosure, we have applied the retrospective method for the acquired reserves, including incurred and paid claim development histories throughout the relevant tables. It should be noted that historical reserves for the acquired businesses were established by the acquired companies using methods, assumptions and procedures then in effect which may differ from our current reserving bases. Accordingly, it may not be appropriate to extrapolate future redundancies or deficiencies based on the aggregated historical results shown in the triangles.\n· Dispositions: We exclude dispositions from all accident years presented in the tables.\n· Claim counts: We consider a reported claim to be one claim for each claimant or feature for each loss occurrence. Claims relating to losses that are 100 percent reinsured are excluded from the reported claims in the tables below. Reported claims for losses from assumed reinsurance contracts are not available and hence not included in the reported claims.\n· There are limitations that should be considered on the reported claim count data in the tables below, including:\n- Claim counts are presented only on a reported (not an ultimate) basis;\n- The tables below include lines of business and geographies at a certain aggregated level which may indicate different frequency and severity trends and characteristics, and may not be as meaningful as the claim count information related to the individual products within those lines of business and geographies;\n- Certain lines of business are more likely to be subject to occurrences involving multiple claimants and features, which can distort measures based on the reported claim counts in the table below; and\n- Reported claim counts are not adjusted for ceded reinsurance, which may distort the measure of frequency or severity.\nSupplemental Information: The information about incurred and paid loss development for all periods preceding year ended December 31, 2018 and the related historical claims payout percentage disclosure is unaudited and is presented as supplementary information.\n248 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following tables present undiscounted, incurred and paid losses and allocated loss adjustment expenses by accident year, on a net basis after reinsurance, with a separate presentation of the Adverse Development Reinsurance Agreement excluding the related amortization of the deferred gain:\nU.S. Workers\' Compensation\nDuring 2018, we recognized $51 million of unfavorable prior year development, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $31 million of favorable prior year development, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 249\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following table provides our attribution of our reinsurance recoverable for the ADC only (included in the table above):\n250 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nU.S. Workers’ Compensation is an extremely long-tail line of business, with loss emergence extending for decades. We generally use a combination of loss development, frequency/severity and expected loss ratio methods for workers’ compensation.\nMany of our primary casualty policies contain risk-sharing features, including high deductibles, self-insured retentions or retrospective rating features, in addition to a traditional insurance component. These risk-sharing programs generally are large and complex, comprising multiple products, years and structures, and are subject to amendment over time. We group guaranteed cost and excess of deductible business separately and then further by state and industry subset to the extent that meaningful differences are determined to exist. We also separately analyze certain subsets of the portfolio that have unique characteristics (e.g., U.S. government sub-contractor accounts and construction wrap-up business). For excess of deductible business, we also segment by size of deductible and whether the claim is handled by AIG or an outside third-party administrator (TPA). The proportion of large deductible business has increased over time, which has slowed the reporting pattern of claims.\nFor guaranteed cost business, expected loss ratio methods generally are given significant weight only in the most recent accident year. Workers’ compensation claims are generally characterized by high frequency, low severity, and relatively consistent loss development from one accident year to the next. We historically have been a leading writer of workers’ compensation, and thus have sufficient volume of claims experience to use development methods. We generally segregate California (CA) and New York (NY) businesses from the other states to reflect their different development patterns and changing percentage of the mix by state. The claims development tables above are impacted by two other significant initiatives, which offset each other. In recent years, we instituted claims strategy changes and loss mitigation efforts to accelerate settlements, which we believe results in an overall reduction in claim costs. This strategy resulted in an increase in paid losses along the latest diagonals relative to prior years. In addition, we have been reducing premium volume in recent years and shifting a greater proportion of business to insured risk retention structures such as high deductible policies. These mix and volume changes slowed paid and incurred development since excess of deductible claims will typically take longer to emerge and settle.\nExpected loss ratio methods for business written in excess of a deductible may be given significant weight in the most recent five accident years. In the 2016 analysis, we increased our tail factor estimates for states other than NY and CA for guaranteed cost business in recognition of longer medical development patterns that we have been seeing in recent years. We reflected increases in legal costs we have seen across the portfolio, particularly in California.\nAdditionally, over the years we have written a number of very large accounts which include workers’ compensation coverage. These accounts are generally individually priced by our actuaries, and to the extent appropriate, the indicated losses based on the pricing analysis may be used to record the initial estimated loss reserves for these accounts.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 251\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $51 million of adverse prior year development in US Workers Compensation business with higher claim development factors at older ages (tail factors) for non-California, non-New York and loss sensitive business in older accident years being offset by favorable emergence in recent years. Accident year 2017 was adversely impacted by a change in ceded reinsurance estimates. For our Defense Base Act (DBA) business, adverse development in recent years was offset by an expansion of the definition of reimbursable War Hazard claims by the US Government.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $31 million of favorable prior year development in U.S. workers’ compensation business, particularly guaranteed cost business in the states of California and New York. Actual loss emergence during the year, particularly for guaranteed cost business in these two states, was significantly less than expected on a reported loss basis. We did recognize some offsetting unfavorable development in our Defense Based Act (DBA) business that covers government contractors in U.S. and non-U.S. military installations, as well as from a Pennsylvania Supreme Court decision that overturned a ruling that provided limitations on payments for certain permanent injuries (the Protz decision).\nDuring 2016, we recognized $1.9 billion of unfavorable prior year development in primary workers’ compensation coverages primarily driven by the risk-sharing programs where we provide coverage in excess of large deductibles. For this excess of large deductible business, in 2016, we observed actual loss emergence and development at significantly greater levels than expected based on our previous experience in particular from losses in excess of $1 million. Since these policies respond to larger claims, the loss reporting pattern is much longer than observed in guaranteed cost workers’ compensation and it takes several years to discern credible changes in the pattern. Furthermore, implementation of claims settlement and loss mitigation strategies over the past several years has made the recent evaluation of data more challenging as historical development patterns may not yet fully reflect these claim and mitigation activities. During 2016, we refined our actuarial methodology by combining data across previously segregated underwriting portfolios to improve our ability to analyze the loss development trends and patterns that had been altered by the mix, claims handling and loss mitigation changes we have made during the last five years. We also developed further segmentations by deductible size and other key parameters, such as claims handled by TPA staff and not our claims department. As a result, we determined that the loss emergence patterns had changed and lengthened significantly from our prior expectation and therefore, we increased our loss development factors.\nIn addition, for workers’ compensation policies with no deductibles (guaranteed cost), we increased our tail factors for the all other states grouping to reflect the latest unfavorable experience in more mature accident years. This change increased the ultimate losses by approximately $440 million in 2016. We also reflected the increasing cost trends for legal and cost containment services, especially in California, as recent trends in this sector have been unfavorable.\nFurthermore, in 2016, the Florida Supreme Court issued two separate rulings that have increased the potential liability for workers’ compensation claims in that state by undoing certain aspects of regulations in place since 2003. The Castellanos ruling eliminated statutory caps on claimant attorney fees in certain cases, and the Westphal ruling eliminated the 104-week limitation on temporary total disability benefits. Also in the second quarter, the Florida Court of Appeals issued the Miles decision, declaring unconstitutional certain restrictions on claimant-paid attorney fees. In in the second quarter 2016, we increased our workers’ compensation reserves by $100 million to reflect our estimate of the costs of these rulings on prior years’ claims.\nU.S. Excess Casualty\nDuring 2018, we recognized $1,274 million of unfavorable prior year development in Excess Casualty, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, driven by higher than expected loss emergence for construction defect and construction wrap claims and increasing loss severity in more recent accident years.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $254 million of unfavorable prior year development in Excess Casualty, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, driven by higher than expected loss emergence.\n252 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 253\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following table provides our attribution of our reinsurance recoverable for the ADC only (included in the table above):\nReserving Process and Methodology\nU.S. Excess Casualty policies tend to attach at a high layer above underlying policies, which causes the loss development pattern to be lagged significantly. Many of the claims notified to the excess layers are closed without payment because the claims never reach our layer as a result of high deductibles and other underlying coverages, while the claims that reach our layer and close with payment can be large and highly variable in terms of reported timing and amount. For a portion of this business, the underlying primary policies are issued by other insurance companies, which can limit our access to relevant information to help inform our judgments as the loss events evolve and mature.\n254 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nWe generally use a combination of loss development methods and expected loss ratio methods for excess casualty product lines. We segment our analysis between automobile-related claims and non-automobile claims, due to the shorter-tail nature of the automobile claims. We then further segment the non-automobile claims for certain latent exposures such as construction defects and mass torts where losses have unique emergence patterns. Mass tort claims in particular may develop over an extended period of time and impact multiple accident years when they emerge. The more standard types of claims are then separately analyzed based on attachment point bands, to recognize that the impact of the level of the attachment point can significantly impact the delay in loss reporting and development. In our analyses, losses capped at $10 million were first analyzed using traditional loss development and expected loss ratio methods and then this estimate was used to derive the expected loss estimate for losses above $10 million reflecting the expected relationships between the layers, reflecting the attachment point and limit.\nExpected loss ratio methods are generally used for at least the three latest accident years, due to the relatively low credibility of the reported losses. The loss experience is generally reviewed separately by attachment point. The expected loss ratios used for recent accident years are based on the projected ultimate loss ratios for older years adjusted for rate changes and loss trend.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $1,274 million of adverse development driven largely by construction defect and construction wrap claims where actual emergence was significantly worse than expected and our updated analysis significantly increased the severity assumptions and lengthened the claim reporting pattern to recognize the significant deterioration seen in recent calendar periods. We also increased the expected loss ratio assumptions in recent accident years to reflect the high initial reported loss ratios for those years and the incidence of several unusually large claims.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $254 million of unfavorable prior year development driven in large part by emerging loss experience in accident year 2016 where frequency and severity to date has exceeded initial expectations and is coinciding with increased loss severity in the underlying primary auto and general liability segments. In addition, we experienced increased development from claims related to construction defects and construction wrap business. The majority of this experience came from accident years 2006 and prior.\nDuring 2016, we recognized $1.1 billion of unfavorable prior year development driven by continued higher than expected loss emergence due to increased frequency and severity in recent accident years for both automobile and general liability claims. Approximately $250 million of the unfavorable development is attributable to a cohort of commercial automobile claims identified in 2015 which continued to increase in severity in 2016 beyond what was observed or reasonably expected in 2015. The most significant increases in incurred losses were for accident years 2011 and subsequent. In particular, the frequency and severity of loss events for accident years 2011 and subsequent showed a significant step change from accident years 2010 and prior. We therefore gave limited credibility to accident year 2010 and prior in selecting our expected loss ratios for 2011 and subsequent accident years due to this shift in loss patterns that is now more evident and credible after examining 2016 data. As a result of the continued adverse emergence, we have increased our loss trend assumptions for general liability and automobile and increased our expected loss ratios for the most recent four accident years.\nU.S. Other Casualty\nU.S Other Casualty includes general liability, commercial auto, medical malpractice, and various other casualty lines of business.\nIn 2018, we recognized $127 million of favorable prior year development in Other Casualty, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, primarily as a result of favorable loss emergence in accident years 2011-2016.\nIn 2017, we recognized $216 million of unfavorable prior year development in Other Casualty, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, primarily as a result of increased loss severity in recent accident years.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 255\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\n256 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following table provides our attribution of our reinsurance recoverable for the ADC only (included in the table above):\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 257\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nU.S. Other Casualty includes general liability, automobile liability, environmental, medical malpractice, and other casualty lines of business. These lines of business are all long-tail in nature and while somewhat diverse in terms of exposures, these lines are often subject to similar trends. These lines are often significantly impacted by the underwriting cycle and external judicial trends. Many of our policies contain risk-sharing features, including high deductibles, self-insured retentions or retrospective rating features, in addition to a traditional insurance component. These risk-sharing programs generally are large and complex, comprising multiple products, years and structures, and are subject to amendment over time.\nWe generally use a combination of loss development methods, frequency/severity and expected loss ratio methods for primary general liability or products liability product lines. We also supplement the standard actuarial techniques by using evaluations of the ultimate losses on unusual claims or claim accumulations by external specialists on those subsets of claims. The segmentation of the data reflects state differences, industry groups, deductible/non-deductible programs and type of claim.\nWe segment our analysis by line of business and key coverage structures (claims-made vs. occurrence, large deductible policies, retrospective-rated policies, captives, etc.). Additionally, certain subsets, such as construction defect for general liability, auto liability policies for trucking business, hospital policies for medical malpractice and underground storage tanks for environmental are generally reviewed separately from business in other subsets. We continually refine our loss reserving techniques for the domestic primary casualty product lines and adopt further segmentations based on our analysis of the differing emerging loss patterns for certain subsets of insureds. Due to the long-tail nature of general liability business, and the many subsets that are reviewed individually, there is less credibility given to the reported losses and increased reliance on expected loss ratio methods for recent accident years.\nFor certain product lines with sufficient loss volume, loss development methods may be given significant weight for all but the most recent one or two accident years. For smaller or more volatile subsets of business and excess of a large deductible business, loss development methods may be given limited weight for the five or more recent accident years. Expected loss ratio methods are used for the more recent accident years for these subsets. The loss experience for primary general liability business is generally reviewed at a level that is believed to provide the most appropriate data for reserve analysis. For other subsets, such as environmental, we utilize a combination of claim analysts’ loss projections and actuarial methods to estimate ultimate losses.\nExpected loss ratio methods are generally given significant weight only in the most recent accident year, except for excess of large deductible business, in which expected loss ratio methods may receive weight for several of the most recent accident years. In recent years, the impact of the increase in the frequency of severe claims was projected in the accident years where it was most prevalent. The resulting increase in ultimate loss projections and loss ratios for those years impacted subsequent years through loss development factors and prior expected loss ratio assumptions.\n258 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nPrior Year Development\nPrimary General Liability\nIn 2018, we increased our ultimate loss estimates for prior accident years by $214 million mainly due to Construction Casualty business, particularly construction defect (CD) claims. Our updated analyses for the construction casualty business reacted to increased severity of claims for both CD and non-CD claims and lengthened the claim reporting pattern for CD claims.\nIn 2017, we increased our ultimate loss estimates for prior accident years by $330 million. This was driven by reported loss development being greater than expected as a result of increased loss severity. We revised our loss trend assumptions which also contributed to increased estimates for the more recent accident years. For older accident years, we experienced increased loss development from construction defect claims and construction wrap business.\nIn 2016, we increased our ultimate loss estimates for prior accident years by $754 million. We increased our assumptions about loss development and expected loss ratios based on the adverse actual versus expected loss emergence driven by increases in severity, especially in the risk-sharing excess of deductible programs. In addition, our segmentation separately evaluated key structural drivers recently identified in the data. As a result, we noted the unfavorable development that was driven by construction defect claims which continue to increase in severity and which exhibit continued higher development at later ages than previously observed. We also identified and separately analyzed in 2016 certain mass tort claims and increased reserves for such claims due to their much longer claim emergence and loss development patterns than previously observed.\nPrimary Commercial Auto Liability\nIn 2018, we reduced our ultimate loss estimates for prior accident years by $142 million mainly due to favorable emergence in recent accident years. Our updated analyses for the auto business reacted to this experience in older years as loss trends have stabilized in the more recent years.\nIn 2017, we increased our ultimate loss estimates for prior accident years by $42 million. A majority of this development related to accident year 2016 where reported loss experience has been emerging greater than expected, driven by an increase in the frequency of large claims. We have experienced severity trends in recent accident years that have been at much higher levels than what has been reflected in the historic data, although we did see some signs of abatement during the second half of the year.\nIn 2016, we continued to observe increases in both the frequency and severity of claims occurring in accident years since the recent U.S. economic downturn. These claims have significantly outpaced both our accident year loss ratio assumptions made in 2015 and the pricing rate increases implemented during the same period. As a result, we recognized $352 million of unfavorable development during 2016 as we increased the expected loss ratios for recent accident years to reflect continued market deterioration in the trends observed in 2016 and the higher reported losses in very recent accident years.\nMedical Malpractice\nDuring 2018, we recognized favorable loss development of approximately $158 million as loss emergence was less than expected in older years due to several large cases settling for less than we expected. Severity in recent years continues to be higher than historical norms.\nDuring 2017, we recognized favorable loss development of $23 million. Reported loss development was less than expected in aggregate; although we did continue to see higher loss severity in the more recent accident years. Premium volume has declined significantly over the last several years and certain segments such as physicians and surgeons, medical products, and nursing homes business (in certain jurisdictions) have been exited entirely.\nDuring 2016, we recognized $428 million of unfavorable development in U.S. Other Casualty medical malpractice comprising primary and excess hospitals and nursing homes coverages. This was in reaction to a continued increase in the frequency of unusually large claims in these classes that drove the adverse actual versus expected loss emergence observed in 2016. Based on the observed adverse emergence and its sustained levels over the last several years, we increased our expected incurred losses and loss ratios for accident years 2011 and subsequent to reflect the distinct step change in the loss ratios from accident years 2010 and prior.\nOther Lines\nDuring 2018, we recognized favorable loss development of approximately $41 million largely due to our environmental impairment liability business where loss activity was better than expected.\nDuring 2017, we recognized favorable loss development of $133 million. The key drivers of this activity were favorable development on loss-sensitive casualty business, environmental impairment liability business, extra-contractual obligations, and business internally reinsured from other business units.\nU.S. Financial Lines\nDuring 2018, we recognized $298 million of unfavorable prior year development in U.S. Financial Lines, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, due to adverse experience in the Directors and Officers (D&O) subset of business\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 259\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nDuring 2017, we recognized $345 million of unfavorable prior year development in U.S. Financial Lines, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, primarily due to adverse experience in the Directors and Officers (D&O) subset of business.\nThe mix of business has been changing in recent years as we write more cyber and mergers and acquisitions business, which generally report claims faster.\n260 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following table provides our attribution of our reinsurance recoverable for the ADC only (included in the table above):\nReserving Process and Methodology\nU.S. Financial Lines business includes D&O, Errors and Omissions (E&O), Employment Practices Liability Insurance (EPLI) and various professional liability subsets of business, as well as the fidelity book of business. This includes cyber coverage and mergers and acquisitions coverage, which have been a growing and evolving portion of this portfolio. These product lines are predominantly claims-made in nature, losses are characterized by low frequency and high severity, and results are often significantly impacted by external economic conditions.\nOur analysis is segmented by major coverages, such as D&O, E&O, etc. and then further segmented by major industry groups (e.g. corporate accounts, national accounts, financial institutions, private/not-for-profit, etc.). We also separately review primary business from excess business for certain product lines.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 261\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nWe generally use a combination of loss development methods and expected loss ratio methods for D&O, E&O, EPLI, and professional liability. These product lines generally are offered on a claims-made basis, and losses are characterized by low frequency and high severity. In general, expected loss ratio methods are given more weight in the more recent accident years, and loss development methods are given more weight in more mature accident years. The loss development factors for the different segments differ significantly in some cases, based on specific coverage characteristics and other factors such as industry group, attachment points, and limits offered. Individual claims projections for accident years ended over eighteen months prior are also used in the analysis.\nFrequency/severity methods are generally not used in isolation for these product lines as the overall losses are driven by large losses more than by claim frequency. Severity trends have varied significantly from accident year to accident year and care is required in analyzing these trends by claim type. We also give weight to claim department ground-up projections of ultimate loss on a claim-by-claim basis as these may be more predictive of ultimate loss values, especially for older accident years.\nWe generally use loss development methods for fidelity exposures for all but the latest accident year. We also use claim department projections of the ultimate value of each reported claim to supplement and inform the standard actuarial approaches and some weight is given to this method in the more recent accident years. For surety exposures, we generally use the same method as for short-tail classes whereby frequency/severity methods, loss development methods, and IBNR factor methods are used alone or in combination to set reserves.\nExpected loss ratio methods are also given weight for the more recent accident years. IBNR factor methods are used, when the nature of losses is low frequency/high severity. The IBNR factors, when applied to earned premium, generate the ultimate expected losses (or other exposure measure) yet to be reported. The factors are determined based on prior accident quarters’ loss costs adjusted to reflect current cost levels and the historical emergence of those loss costs. The factors are continually reevaluated to reflect emerging claim experience, rate changes or other factors that could affect the adequacy of the IBNR factor being employed.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $298 million of unfavorable prior year development particularly across accident years 2014-2017. The largest share of the unfavorable development came from D&O and EPLI for Corporate and National accounts and resulted largely from increases in severity as the costs of security class actions increased. Excess D&O also contributed adverse development due to similar causes.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $345 million of unfavorable prior year development particularly in accident year 2016. The largest share of the unfavorable development came from D&O for privately owned and not-for -profit insureds and resulted largely from increases in bankruptcy-related claims and fiduciary liability claims for large educational institutions. Other segments of the portfolio contributed largely offsetting favorable and unfavorable development; notably, development was unfavorable for excess D&O and employment practices liability while development was favorable for fidelity and D&O for corporate and national accounts.\nDuring 2016, we recognized $306 million of unfavorable prior year development as we reacted to the unfavorable actual versus expected in 2016 driven by higher than expected settlements on several large claims from the financial crisis for accident years 2006 to 2010, as well as unfavorable emergence of errors and omissions losses relative to historical expectations. In addition to the unfavorable emergence, we also updated our loss development factor assumptions, expected loss ratio assumptions and the weights given to the various methods in recent accident years.\nU.S. Property and Special Risks\nDuring 2018, we recognized $497 million of favorable prior year development in U.S. Property and Special Risks, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, mainly due to favorable development from the 2017 Catastrophes.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $115 million of unfavorable prior year development in U.S. Property and Special Risks, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, mainly due to unfavorable development from the commercial auto portion of the Program business unit, which offers multiline policies to small and mid-sized insureds.\n262 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 263\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following table provides our attribution of our reinsurance recoverable for the ADC only (included in the table above):\n264 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nU.S. Property products include commercial, industrial and energy-related property insurance products and services that cover exposures to manmade and natural disasters, including business interruption. U.S. Special Risk products include aerospace, environmental, political risk, trade credit, surety and marine insurance, and program business for various small and medium sized enterprises insurance lines. The program segments include both property and casualty exposures.\nWe primarily segment our analysis by line of business. Additionally, we separately review various subsets, including hull, cargo, and liability for marine business, aviation and satellite for aerospace business, and various other specific programs and product lines.\nFrequency/severity methods, loss development methods, and IBNR factor methods are used alone or in combination to set reserves for short-tail classes such as U.S. Property.\nIBNR factor methods are used when the nature of losses is low frequency/high severity. The IBNR factors, when applied to earned premium, generate the ultimate expected losses (or other exposure measure) yet to be reported. The factors are determined based on prior accident quarters’ loss costs adjusted to reflect current cost levels and the historical emergence of those loss costs. The factors are continually reevaluated to reflect emerging claim experience, rate changes or other factors that could affect the adequacy of the IBNR factor being employed.\nWe generally use a combination of loss development methods and expected loss ratio methods for aviation exposures. Aviation claims are not very long-tail in nature; however, they are driven by claim severity. Thus a combination of both development and expected loss ratio methods is used for all but the latest accident year to determine the loss reserves. Frequency/severity methods are not employed due to the high severity nature of the claims and different mix of claims from year to year.\nWe generally use loss development methods for fidelity exposures for all but the latest accident year. We also use claim department projections of the ultimate value of each reported claim to supplement and inform the standard actuarial approaches and some weight is given to this method in the more recent accident years. The claims staff also provides specific estimates to assist in the setting of reserves for natural catastrophe losses.\nFor program business, we use methods which vary by line of business. For property classes, we use methods similar to those noted above. For liability classes, we use methods similar to those described in the casualty sections detailed above.\nExpected loss ratio methods are used to determine the loss reserves for the latest accident year. We also use ground-up claim projections provided by our claims staff to assist in developing the appropriate reserve.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $497 million of favorable prior year development in U.S. Property and Special Risks driven largely by favorable development on the 2017 Catastrophes as well as favorable emergence on non-Catastrophe Commercial Property, and Program and Specialty classes.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $115 million of unfavorable prior year development primarily driven by commercial auto business in the program business unit. A significant portion of this development came from accident year 2016 with much of it related to programs that have been terminated over the past year. We also experienced some individual severe loss experience, also mostly related to accident year 2016 in other lines of business including aviation, surety, and marine; however, this was largely offset by favorable development in commercial property.\nDuring 2016, we recognized $396 million of unfavorable prior year development driven by our U.S. program business where we recognized $350 million of unfavorable prior year development due to higher than expected claim emergence in certain automobile, habitational and professional liability programs that resulted in our increasing expected loss ratios and loss development factors for several program subsets.\nU.S. Personal Insurance\nDuring 2018, we recognized $255 million of unfavorable prior year development in U.S. Personal Insurance, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, mainly due to catastrophe development from accident year 2017.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $16 million of unfavorable prior year development in U.S. Personal Insurance, net of external reinsurance but before ADC cessions, mainly due to homeowners business in accident year 2016. This was partially offset by favorable development in accident and health business.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 265\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\n266 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following table provides our attribution of our reinsurance recoverable for the ADC only (included in the table above):\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 267\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nU.S. Personal Insurance consists of accident and health and personal lines. Accident and health products include voluntary and sponsor-paid personal accident and supplemental health products for individuals, employees, associations and other organizations as well as a broad range of travel insurance products and services for leisure and business travelers. Personal lines include automobile and homeowners’ insurance, extended warranty, and consumer specialty products, such as identity theft and credit card protection. Personal lines also provides insurance for high net worth individuals offered through AIG Private Client Group, including auto, homeowners, umbrella, yacht, fine art and collections insurance. Personal lines are generally short-tail in nature.\nWe primarily segment our analysis by line of business and may separately review various sub-segments, such as specific accident and health products and property damage versus liability for personal lines products.\nFrequency/severity methods, loss development methods, and IBNR factor methods are used alone or in combination to set reserves for short-tail product lines such as personal property.\nFrequency/severity and loss development methods are utilized for domestic personal auto product lines.\nFor these classes of business, reliance is placed on frequency/severity methods as claim counts emerge quickly for personal auto. Frequency/severity methods allow for more immediate analysis of resulting loss trends and comparisons to industry and other diagnostic metrics.\nIn general, development for U.S. Personal Insurance classes has been very stable, with only modest changes in the initial selected loss ratios for this business.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $255 million of adverse prior year development in US Personal Insurance driven largely by development on the California Wildfires and Hurricane Irma in 2017.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $16 million of unfavorable prior year development in U.S. Personal Insurance mainly due to homeowners business in accident year 2016, particularly from catastrophe activity. This was partially offset by favorable development in accident and health business.\nDuring 2016, we recognized $32 million of favorable development mainly driven by accident and health business.\nUK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines\nDuring 2018, we recognized $58 million of unfavorable prior year development in Europe Casualty and Financial Lines driven by greater frequency of large losses than expected.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $507 million of unfavorable prior year development in UK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines, net of external reinsurance, driven by continued higher than expected loss emergence.\n268 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 269\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nUK/Europe is our largest non-U.S. region for Liability and Financial Lines. UK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines is composed of third-party coverages including general liability, auto liability, D&O, professional liability and various other lines of business throughout both the UK and Continental Europe. These lines of business are all long-tail in nature and while somewhat diverse in terms of exposures, these lines are often subject to similar trends. These lines are impacted by the underwriting cycle and external judicial trends. The largest share of business is in the UK, but significant business is also written in other European countries such as Germany, France, and Italy.\nWe primarily segment our analysis by country and line of business. Additionally, we separately review various product lines, including excess versus primary casualty, commercial versus financial institutions management liability, and other specific programs and subsets of business. We maintain a database of detailed historical premium and loss transactions in original currency for business written outside of the U.S. which allows our actuaries to determine loss reserves without foreign exchange distorting development.\nWe generally use a combination of loss development methods and expected loss ratio methods. For countries and lines of business with sufficient loss volume, loss development methods may be given significant weight for all but the most recent accident years. For smaller countries and more volatile product lines, loss development methods are typically given limited weight for recent accident years. Further, we may rely on larger data subsets in determining the loss development factors and a priori loss ratio assumptions.\nIn general, the loss development for long-tail lines in UK/Europe has been more stable than the development in U.S. long-tail lines, although some underlying drivers have affected the results in a similar manner (e.g. the impact of the financial crisis in accident years 2008 and 2009).\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $58 million of unfavorable prior year development in UK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines driven by increased large loss activity in recent accident years, particularly related to directors and officers class action suits against insureds with global exposure; and increased severity in excess casualty.\nDuring 2017 we recognized $507 million of unfavorable prior year development in UK/Europe casualty and Financial Lines. We observed a significant increase in large claims activity across multiple segments, notably excess casualty business and D&O and professional liability coverages for financial institutions. This experience was spread across multiple accident years but had the largest impact on accident year 2016 and accident years 2008 and prior. We increased loss development assumptions for Financial Lines business in consideration of the increased loss activity experienced in older accident years and increased expected loss ratios for more recent accident years. For Casualty lines, we increased loadings for large losses, particularly in the more recent accident years. In addition, we increased our loss reserves as a result of the decision made by the U.K. Ministry of Justice to reduce the discount rate applied to lump-sum bodily injury payouts, known as the Ogden rate.\nDuring 2016, we recognized $320 million of unfavorable prior year development. Within UK/Europe Financial Lines, we recognized $232 million of unfavorable development primarily from the D&O line in UK and Continental Europe as result of the unfavorable actual versus expected loss emergence in 2016 due to increased frequency and severity resulting from increasing litigation. In UK/Europe Casualty we recognized $123 million of unfavorable development primarily from the unexpected emergence of several large excess casualty claims. The actual versus expected loss emergence for UK/Europe Casualty and Financial Lines was more than expected.\nUK/Europe Property and Special Risks\nDuring 2018, we recognized $22 million of favorable prior year development in the UK/Europe Property and Special Risks segment, net of external reinsurance.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $157 million of unfavorable prior year development in the UK/Europe Property and Special Risks segment, net of external reinsurance, driven primarily by unexpected development on large claims, primarily from accident years 2015 and 2016.\n270 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 271\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nUK/Europe Property products include commercial, industrial and energy-related property insurance products and services that cover exposures to manmade and natural disasters, including business interruption. UK/Europe Special Risk products include aerospace, environmental, political risk, trade credit, surety and marine insurance, and various small and medium sized enterprises insurance lines.\nWe primarily segment our analysis by line of business. Additionally, we separately review various subsets, including hull, cargo, and liability for marine business, aviation and satellite for aerospace business, and various other specific programs and product lines.\nFrequency/severity methods, loss development methods, and IBNR factor methods are used alone or in combination to set reserves for short-tail classes such as UK/Europe Property.\nIBNR factor methods are used when the nature of losses is low frequency/high severity. The IBNR factors, when applied to earned premium, generate the ultimate expected losses (or other exposure measure) yet to be reported. The factors are determined based on prior accident quarters’ loss costs adjusted to reflect current cost levels and the historical emergence of those loss costs. The factors are continually reevaluated to reflect emerging claim experience, rate changes or other factors that could affect the adequacy of the IBNR factor being employed.\nWe generally use a combination of loss development methods and expected loss ratio methods for aviation exposures. Aviation claims are not very long-tail in nature; however, they are driven by claim severity. Thus a combination of both development and expected loss ratio methods is used for all but the latest accident year to determine the loss reserves. Frequency/severity methods are not employed due to the high severity nature of the claims and different mix of claims from year to year.\nWe generally use loss development methods for fidelity exposures for all but the latest accident year. We also use claim department projections of the ultimate value of each reported claim to supplement and inform the standard actuarial approaches and some weight is given to this method in the more recent accident years. The claims staff also provides specific estimates to assist in the setting of reserves for natural catastrophe losses.\nExpected loss ratio methods are used to determine the loss reserves for the latest accident year. We also use ground-up claim projections provided by our claims staff to assist in developing the appropriate reserve.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $22 million of favorable prior year development in the Europe Property and Special Risks segment driven by favorable development across most accident years with some adverse development in accident years 2014 and 2016.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $157 million of unfavorable prior year development, primarily from accident years 2015 and 2016. This was largely driven by large individual claim development in the property, aviation, marine, and trade credit lines of business.\nDuring 2016, we recognized $11 million of unfavorable prior year development, primarily from the property segment.\nUK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance\nDuring 2018, we recognized $116 million of favorable prior year development in UK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance, net of external reinsurance.\nDuring 2017, we recognized $58 million of favorable prior year development in UK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance, net of external reinsurance, mainly due to accident and health business.\n272 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 273\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nUK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance lines consist of accident and health and personal lines. Accident and health products include voluntary and sponsor-paid personal accident and supplemental health products for individuals, employees, associations and other organizations as well as a broad range of travel insurance products and services for leisure and business travelers. Personal lines include automobile and homeowners’ insurance, extended warranty, and consumer specialty products, such as identity theft and credit card protection. Personal lines are generally short-tail in nature.\nWe primarily segment our analysis by line of business (and by country for UK/Europe and Japan business) and may separately review various sub-segments, such as specific accident and health products and property damage versus liability for other personal lines products.\nFrequency/severity methods, loss development methods, and IBNR factor methods are used alone or in combination to set reserves for short-tail product lines such as personal property.\nFrequency/severity and loss development methods are utilized for domestic personal auto product lines.\nFor these classes of business, reliance is placed on frequency/severity methods as claim counts emerge quickly for personal auto. Frequency/severity methods allow for more immediate analysis of resulting loss trends and comparisons to industry and other diagnostic metrics.\nIn general, development for UK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance classes has been very stable, with only modest changes in the initial selected loss ratios for this business.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, we recognized $116 million of favorable prior year development in UK/Europe and Japan Personal Insurance due to favorable emergence on catastrophes, accident and health business, and personal auto business.\nDuring 2017 and 2016, we recognized $58 million and $82 million of favorable development, respectively, mainly driven by the accident and health business.\nU.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance Lines\nDuring 2018, the U.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance Lines experienced favorable prior year development of $4 million, net of external reinsurance.\nDuring 2017, the U.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance Lines experienced favorable prior year development of $30 million, net of external reinsurance, driven primarily by favorable asbestos development.\n274 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 275\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nReserving Process and Methodology\nU.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance lines include run-off lines for asbestos and environmental (1986 and prior), excess workers’ compensation, and other casualty coverages consisting of environmental impairment liability and related coverages, medical malpractice, workers’ compensation, and general liability. In some cases, the exposures in the more recent years have declined since the portfolio is in run-off.\nAsbestos and Environmental (1986 and prior)\nAsbestos coverage has been excluded from AIG policies commencing in 1985. Most of AIG’s asbestos claims exposures are ceded to National Indemnity Company (NICO) under a retroactive reinsurance arrangement entered into in 2011. Many of other asbestos-related exposures are very long-tailed in nature and with exposures dating back 30 years or more. We consider a number of factors and recent experience in addition to the results of both external and internal analyses, to estimate asbestos and pre-1986 environmental loss reserves. We primarily base our determination of these loss reserves on a combination of ground-up and top-down analyses of historical claims and available insurance coverages. Nonetheless, we believe that significant uncertainty remains as to our ultimate liability for asbestos and environmental claims, which is due to several factors, including:\n• the long latency period between asbestos exposure and disease manifestation, and pollution events occurring undetected over many years, leading to the potential for involvement of multiple policy periods for individual claims;\n• claims filed under the non-aggregate premises or operations section of general liability policies;\n• the number of insureds seeking bankruptcy protection and the effect of prepackaged bankruptcies;\n• diverging legal interpretations; and\n• the difficulty in estimating the allocation of remediation cost among various parties with respect to environmental claims.\nLoss reserves for asbestos and environmental claims cannot be estimated using conventional reserving techniques such as those that rely on historical accident year loss development factors. The methods used to determine asbestos and environmental loss estimates and to establish the resulting reserves are continually reviewed and updated by management.\nExcess Workers’ Compensation\nExcess workers’ compensation has an extremely long tail and is one of the most challenging lines of business from a reserving perspective, particularly when the excess coverage is provided above a self-insured retention layer. The class is highly sensitive to small changes in assumptions (for example - in the rate of medical inflation or the longevity of injured workers) which can have a significant effect on the ultimate reserve cost estimate.\nExcess Workers’ Compensation business was written over qualified self-insurance by various divisions beginning in the 1980’s. In 1992, this business was consolidated into one division where it continued writing business up until 2011, when it was effectively put into runoff. In this book of business, the claims are not handled (or administered) by AIG General Insurance claims personnel, but are administered by the client’s designated TPA. However, AIG General Insurance claims personnel maintain an oversight role over these TPAs and claims.\nLoss and loss adjustment expense liability estimates for excess workers’ compensation exposures are subject to additional uncertainties, due to the following:\n• claim settlement time is longer than most other casualty lines, due to the lifetime benefits that can be expected to payout on certain claims;\n• coverage statutes that vary by state; and\n• future medical inflation costs are difficult to estimate\nFor this business, a combination of traditional methods (paid and incurred loss development) and non-traditional methods (individual claim annuity model, report yea incurred loss development, and pure IBNR count/severity methods) are used to estimate loss and loss expense liability estimates. Loss data is segmented so as to reflect the anomalies in the historical data due to the various loss mitigation initiatives employed over the last several years.\n276 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nOther Casualty Run-Off\nAs noted above, other legacy exposures include environmental impairment liability and related coverages, medical malpractice, workers’ compensation, and general liability. Depending on the individual class or lines of business reviewed, either traditional methods (i.e. paid loss development, incurred loss development), non-traditional methods (such as paid survival ratio or IBNR-to-case ratio methods) or a combination of the two are used. In addition, for some of the environmental impairment liability related coverage, approaches based on individual claim department estimates for large remediation sites are extensively included as part of the overall actuarial estimates for environmental impairment liability related exposures.\nPrior Year Development\nDuring 2018, the U.S. Run-Off Long Tail Insurance Lines recognized $4 million of favorable prior year development with adverse development on pre-1986 pollution business offset by favorable development in Excess Auto Liability, Environmental, and Healthcare Lines.\nDuring 2017, the U.S. Run-Off long tail insurance lines recognized $30 million of favorable prior year development.\nDuring 2016, the U.S. Run-Off long tail insurance lines recognized $390 million of unfavorable prior year development.\nAsbestos and Environmental (1986 and prior)\nIn 2018, we recognized no change on the retained portion of asbestos claims. The development on the portion of the asbestos business ceded to NICO was unfavorable by $96 million on a gross basis, but had no net impact. For environmental, we recognized $150 million in unfavorable prior year development as a result of adverse claim emergence and top-down actuarial analyses performed during the year.\nIn 2017, we recognized favorable net prior year development of $37 million on the retained portion of asbestos claims. This was primarily due to additional reinsurance recoveries identified for this portfolio. The development on the portion of the asbestos business ceded to NICO was unfavorable by $50 million on a gross basis, but had no net impact. For environmental, we recognized $22 million in unfavorable prior year development in consideration of activity related to several large clean-up sites and related accounts as well as a result of top-down actuarial analyses performed during the year. As part of this analysis, we increased our estimates of unallocated loss adjustment expense reserves for such claims, which were partially offset by a decrease in indemnity reserves.\nIn 2016, we increased gross undiscounted asbestos incurred losses by $106 million and decreased net undiscounted asbestos incurred losses by $20 million. The gross undiscounted change reflects an increase in estimates related to our accounts retroceded to NICO. The favorable development of the net incurred losses was largely a result of higher estimated external reinsurance recoveries on our retained asbestos exposures. For environmental, we increased incurred losses by $211 million primarily due to unfavorable development on several large clean-up sites and related accounts as well as a result of top down actuarial analyses performed during the year.\nExcess Workers’ Compensation\nWe did not recognize any material development in this segment during 2018, 2017 or 2016. The proactive management of settlement negotiations and other claims mitigation strategies minimized the volatility observed during this period.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 277\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nOther Casualty Run-Off\nDuring 2018, prior year development was favorable by $154 million driven by favorable emergence on runoff excess trucking, Environmental and Healthcare segments and other runoff lines.\nIn 2017, the net prior year development for the remaining legacy was favorable by $15 million. We experienced favorable development on runoff medical malpractice and environmental impairment liability business, which was partially offset by net unfavorable development on other casualty segments.\nWe increased the reserves for these coverages by $190 million during 2016 to reflect updated assumptions about future loss development. The increase was driven by runoff public entity business where we reacted to the adverse emergence over the last year by increasing our loss development factors to reflect the portfolio’s experience especially in the loss tail instead of relying on the overall excess casualty loss development factors.\nThe table below presents the reconciliation of change in net ultimates from tables above to prior year development for the year ended December 31, 2018:\n(a) Change in net ultimate loss and LAE excludes the portion of prior year development for which we have ceded to the Asbestos Loss Portfolio Transfer (LPT) and the Adverse Development Cover (ADC), both of which are provided by NICO and are considered retroactive reinsurance under US GAAP. Amounts shown exclude $30 million of pre-acquisition prior year development from Validus. Validus\' pre-acquisition development is included in the 10-year triangles shown above but is not included in AIG\'s financial results.\n(b) Reattribution of the ADC recovery takes place annually as we model the future payments on the subject reserves covered by the ADC to determine when the aggregate payments will exceed the attachment. ADC recoverables are then reallocated by line based on payments expected to be made after attachment point is exceeded.\n278 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nPrior Year Development before 2009\nThe previous development tables include only accident years 2009 to 2018. The following table summarizes (favorable) unfavorable development, of incurred losses and loss adjustment expenses for accident year 2008 and prior by operating segment and major class of business:\nClaims Payout Patterns\nThe following table presents the historical average annual percentage claims payout on an accident year basis at the same level of disaggregation as presented in the claims development table.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 279\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nDiscounting of Loss Reserves\nAt December 31, 2018, the loss reserves reflect a net loss reserve discount of $2.0 billion, including tabular and non-tabular calculations based upon the following assumptions:\nCertain asbestos claims are discounted when allowed by the regulator and when payments are fixed and determinable, based on the investment yields of the companies and the payout pattern for the claims. At December 31, 2016, the discount for asbestos reserves was amortized.\nThe tabular workers’ compensation discount is calculated based on a 3.5 percent interest rate and the mortality rate used in the 2007 U.S. Life Table.\nThe non-tabular workers’ compensation discount is calculated separately for companies domiciled in New York and Pennsylvania, and follows the statutory regulations (prescribed or permitted) for each state. For New York companies, the discount is based on a 5 percent interest rate and the companies’ own payout patterns. In 2012, for Pennsylvania companies, the statute has specified discount factors for accident years 2001 and prior, which are based on a 6 percent interest rate and an industry payout pattern. For accident years 2002 and subsequent, the discount is based on the payout patterns and investment yields of the companies.\nIn 2013, our Pennsylvania regulator approved use of a consistent discount rate (U.S. Treasury rate plus a liquidity premium) to all of our workers’ compensation reserves in our Pennsylvania-domiciled companies, as well as our use of updated payout patterns specific to our primary and excess workers compensation portfolios.\nThe discount consists of $603 million of tabular discount and $1.4 billion of non-tabular discount for workers’ compensation for 2018. During the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016 the benefit/(charge) from changes in discount of $371 million, ($187) million and $422 million, respectively, were recorded as part of the policyholder benefits and losses incurred in the Condensed Consolidated Statement of Income.\nThe following table presents the components of the loss reserve discount discussed above:\n* Excludes $163 million and $173 million of discount related to certain long tail liabilities in the United Kingdom at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nThe following table presents the net loss reserve discount benefit (charge):\n* Excludes $(9) million and $8 million of discount related to certain long tail liabilities in the United Kingdom at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n280 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nDuring 2018, effective interest rates increased due to an increase in the forward yield curve component of the discount rates reflecting an incline in U.S. Treasury rates along with the changes in payout pattern assumptions. This resulted in an increase in the loss reserve discount by $418 million in 2018.\nDuring 2017 and 2016, effective interest rates declined due to a decrease in the forward yield curve component of the discount rates reflecting a decline in U.S. Treasury rates along with the changes in payout pattern assumptions. This resulted in a decrease in the loss reserve discount by $71 million in 2017 and $106 million in 2016.\nFuture Policy Benefits\nFuture policy benefits primarily include reserves for traditional life and annuity payout contracts, which represent an estimate of the present value of future benefits less the present value of future net premiums. Included in Future policy benefits are liabilities for annuities issued in structured settlement arrangements whereby a claimant has agreed to settle a general insurance claim in exchange for fixed payments over a fixed determinable period of time with a life contingency feature. In addition, reserves for contracts in loss recognition are adjusted to reflect the effect of unrealized gains on fixed maturity securities available for sale and prior to 2018, equity securities at fair value, with related changes recognized through Other comprehensive income.\nFuture policy benefits also include certain guaranteed benefits of variable annuity products that are not considered embedded derivatives, primarily guaranteed minimum death benefits.\nFor additional information on guaranteed minimum death benefits see Note 14.\nThe liability for long-duration future policy benefits has been established including assumptions for interest rates which vary by year of issuance and product, and range from approximately 0.1 percent to 14.6 percent. Mortality and surrender rate assumptions are generally based on actual experience when the liability is established.\nPolicyholder Contract Deposits\nThe liability for Policyholder contract deposits is primarily recorded at accumulated value (deposits received and net transfers from separate accounts, plus accrued interest credited at rates ranging from 0.3 percent to 10.0 percent at December 31, 2018, less withdrawals and assessed fees). Deposits collected on investment-oriented products are not reflected as revenues, because they are recorded directly to Policyholder contract deposits upon receipt. Amounts assessed against the contract holders for mortality, administrative, and other services are included in revenues.\nIn addition to liabilities for universal life, fixed annuities, fixed options within variable annuities, annuities without life contingencies, funding agreements and GICs, policyholder contract deposits also include our liability for (a) certain guaranteed benefits and indexed features accounted for as embedded derivatives at fair value, (b) annuities issued in a structured settlement arrangement with no life contingency and (c) certain contracts we have elected to account for at fair value.\nFor additional information on guaranteed benefits accounted for as embedded derivatives see Note 14 herein.\nFor universal life policies with secondary guarantees, we recognize certain liabilities in addition to policyholder account balances. For universal life policies with secondary guarantees, as well as other universal life policies for which profits followed by losses are expected at contract inception, a liability is recognized based on a benefit ratio of (a) the present value of total expected payments, in excess of the account value, over the life of the contract, divided by (b) the present value of total expected assessments over the life of the contract. For universal life policies without secondary guarantees, for which profits followed by losses are first expected after contract inception, we establish a liability, in addition to policyholder account balances, so that expected future losses are recognized in proportion to the emergence of profits in the earlier (profitable) years. Universal life account balances as well as these additional liabilities related to universal life products are reported within Policyholder contract deposits in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. These additional liabilities are also adjusted to reflect the effect of unrealized gains or losses on fixed maturity securities available for sale and prior to 2018, equity securities at fair value on accumulated assessments, with related changes recognized through Other comprehensive income.\nUnder a funding agreement-backed notes issuance program, an unaffiliated, non-consolidated statutory trust issues medium-term notes to investors, which are secured by GICs issued to the trust by one of our Life and Retirement companies through our Institutional Markets business.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 281\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 13. Insurance Liabilities\nThe following table presents Policyholder contract deposits by product line:\nOther Policyholder Funds\nOther policyholder funds include unearned revenue reserves (URR). URR consist of front-end loads on investment-oriented contracts, representing those policy loads that are non-level and typically higher in initial policy years than in later policy years. URR for investment-oriented contracts are generally deferred and amortized, with interest, in relation to the incidence of estimated gross profits (EGPs) to be realized over the estimated lives of the contracts and are subject to the same adjustments due to changes in the assumptions underlying EGPs as DAC. Amortization of URR is recorded in Policy fees. Similar to Shadow DAC, URR related to investment-oriented products is also adjusted to reflect the effect of unrealized gains or losses on fixed maturity securities available for sale and also, prior to 2018, equity securities at fair value on estimated gross profits, with related changes recognized through Other comprehensive income (shadow URR).\nOther policyholder funds also include provisions for future dividends to participating policyholders, accrued in accordance with all applicable regulatory or contractual provisions. Participating life business represented approximately 1.7 percent of gross insurance in force at December 31, 2018 and 2.4 percent of gross domestic premiums and other considerations in 2018. The amount of annual dividends to be paid is approved locally by the boards of directors of the Life and Retirement companies. Provisions for future dividend payments are computed by jurisdiction, reflecting local regulations. The portions of current and prior net income and of current unrealized appreciation of investments that can inure to our benefit are restricted in some cases by the insurance contracts and by the local insurance regulations of the jurisdictions in which the policies are in force.\nCertain products are subject to experience adjustments. These include group life and group medical products, credit life contracts, accident and health insurance contracts/riders attached to life policies and, to a limited extent, reinsurance agreements with other direct insurers. Ultimate premiums from these contracts are estimated and recognized as revenue with the unearned portions of the premiums recorded as liabilities in Other policyholder funds. Experience adjustments vary according to the type of contract and the territory in which the policy is in force and are subject to local regulatory guidance.\n282 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 14. Variable Life and Annuity Contracts\n14. Variable Life and Annuity Contracts\nWe report variable contracts within the separate accounts when investment income and investment gains and losses accrue directly to, and investment risk is borne by, the contract holder and the separate account meets additional accounting criteria to qualify for separate account treatment. The assets supporting the variable portion of variable annuity and variable universal life contracts that qualify for separate account treatment are carried at fair value and reported as Separate account assets, with an equivalent summary total reported as Separate account liabilities.\nPolicy values for variable products and investment contracts are expressed in terms of investment units. Each unit is linked to an asset portfolio. The value of a unit increases or decreases based on the value of the linked asset portfolio. The current liability at any time is the sum of the current unit value of all investment units in the separate accounts, plus any liabilities for guaranteed minimum death benefits (GMDB) or guaranteed minimum withdrawal benefits (GMWB) included in Future policy benefits or Policyholder contract deposits, respectively.\nAmounts assessed against the contract holders for mortality, administrative and other services are included in revenue. Net investment income, net investment gains and losses, changes in fair value of assets, and policyholder account deposits and withdrawals related to separate accounts are excluded from the Consolidated Statements of Income, Comprehensive Income (Loss) and Cash Flows.\nVariable annuity contracts may include certain contractually guaranteed benefits to the contract holder. These guaranteed features include GMDB that are payable in the event of death, and living benefits that are payable in the event of annuitization, or, in other instances, at specified dates during the accumulation period. Living benefits primarily include GMWB. A variable annuity contract may include more than one type of guaranteed benefit feature; for example, it may have both a GMDB and a GMWB. However, a policyholder can only receive payout from one guaranteed feature on a contract containing a death benefit and a living benefit, i.e. the features are mutually exclusive (except a surviving spouse who has a rider to potentially collect both a GMDB upon their spouse’s death and a GMWB during their lifetime). A policyholder cannot purchase more than one living benefit on one contract. The net amount at risk for each feature is calculated irrespective of the existence of other features; as a result, the net amount at risk for each feature is not additive to that of other features.\nAccount balances of variable annuity contracts with guarantees were invested in separate account investment options as follows:\nGMDB\nDepending on the contract, the GMDB feature may provide a death benefit of either (a) total deposits made to the contract less any partial withdrawals plus a minimum return (and in rare instances, no minimum return) or (b) the highest contract value attained, typically on any anniversary date minus any subsequent withdrawals following the contract anniversary. GMDB is our most widely offered benefit.\nThe liability for GMDB, which is recorded in Future policy benefits, represents the expected value of benefits in excess of the projected account value, with the excess recognized ratably over the accumulation period based on total expected assessments, through Policyholder benefits and losses incurred. The net amount at risk for GMDB represents the amount of benefits in excess of account value if death claims were filed on all contracts on the balance sheet date.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 283\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 14. Variable Life and Annuity Contracts\nThe following table presents details concerning our GMDB exposures, by benefit type:\nThe following summarizes GMDB liability related to variable annuity contracts, excluding assumed reinsurance:\nAssumptions used to determine the GMDB liability include interest rates, which vary by year of issuance and products; mortality rates, which are based upon actual experience modified to allow for variations in policy form; lapse rates, which are based upon actual experience modified to allow for variations in policy form; investment returns, using assumptions from a randomly generated model; and asset growth assumptions, which include a reversion to the mean methodology, similar to that applied for DAC.\nWe regularly evaluate estimates used to determine the GMDB liability and adjust the additional liability balance, with a related charge or credit to Policyholder benefits and losses incurred, if actual experience or other evidence suggests that earlier assumptions should be revised.\nGMWB\nCertain of our variable annuity contracts contain optional GMWB benefits and, to a lesser extent, guaranteed minimum accumulation benefits, which are not currently offered. With a GMWB, the contract holder can monetize the excess of the guaranteed amount over the account value of the contract only through a series of withdrawals that do not exceed a specific percentage per year of the guaranteed amount. If, after the series of withdrawals, the account value is exhausted, the contract holder will receive a series of annuity payments equal to the remaining guaranteed amount, and, for lifetime GMWB products, the annuity payments continue as long as the covered person(s) is living.\nThe liabilities for GMWB, which are recorded in Policyholder contract deposits, are accounted for as embedded derivatives measured at fair value, with changes in the fair value of the liabilities recorded in Other net realized capital gains (losses). The fair value of these embedded derivatives was a net liability of $1.9 billion and $2.0 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nFor a discussion of the fair value measurement of guaranteed benefits that are accounted for as embedded derivatives see Note 5.\nWe had account values subject to GMWB that totaled $41 billion and $45 billion at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The net amount at risk for GMWB represents the present value of minimum guaranteed withdrawal payments, in accordance with contract terms, in excess of account value, assuming no lapses. The net amount at risk related to the GMWB guarantees was $215 million and $450 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. We use derivative instruments and other financial instruments to mitigate a portion of our exposure that arises from GMWB benefits.\n284 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 15. Debt\n15. Debt\nOur long-term debt is denominated in various currencies, with both fixed and variable interest rates. Long-term debt is carried at the principal amount borrowed, including unamortized discounts, hedge accounting valuation adjustments and fair value adjustments, when applicable.\nThe following table lists our total debt outstanding at December 31, 2018 and 2017. The interest rates presented in the following table are the range of contractual rates in effect at December 31, 2018, including fixed and variable-rates:\n(a) AIG Parent guarantees all such debt, except for MIP notes payable and Series AIGFP matched notes and bonds payable, which are direct obligations of AIG Parent. Collateral posted to third parties was $1.5 billion and $2.0 billion at December 31, 2018 and December 31, 2017, respectively. This collateral primarily consists of securities of the U.S. government and government sponsored entities and generally cannot be repledged or resold by the counterparties.\n(b) At December 31, 2018, includes debt of consolidated investment vehicles related to real estate investments of $3.7 billion, affordable housing partnership investments of $1.8 billion and other securitization vehicles of $2.9 billion. At December 31, 2017, includes debt of consolidated investment vehicles related to real estate investments of $2.5 billion, affordable housing partnership investments of $1.8 billion and other securitization vehicles of $1.7 billion.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 285\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 15. Debt\nThe following table presents maturities of long-term debt (including unamortized original issue discount, hedge accounting valuation adjustments and fair value adjustments, when applicable), excluding $8.4 billion of debt of consolidated investments:\nUncollateralized and collateralized notes, bonds, loans and mortgages payable consisted of the following:\n* AIG does not guarantee any of these borrowings.\nAIGLH Junior Subordinated Debentures\nIn connection with our acquisition of AIG Life Holdings, Inc. (AIGLH) in 2001, we entered into arrangements with AIGLH with respect to outstanding AIGLH capital securities. In 1996, AIGLH issued capital securities through a trust to institutional investors and funded the trust with AIGLH junior subordinated debentures issued to the trust with the same terms as the capital securities.\nOn July 11, 2013, the AIGLH junior subordinated debentures were distributed to holders of the capital securities, the capital securities were cancelled and the trusts were dissolved. At December 31, 2018, the junior subordinated debentures outstanding consisted of $113 million of 8.5 percent junior subordinated debentures due July 2030, $211 million of 8.125 percent junior subordinated debentures due March 2046 and $37 million of 7.57 percent junior subordinated debentures due December 2045, each guaranteed by AIG Parent.\nCredit Facilities\nWe maintain a committed, revolving syndicated credit facility (the Facility) as a potential source of liquidity for general corporate purposes. The Facility provides for aggregate commitments by the bank syndicate to provide unsecured revolving loans and/or standby letters of credit of up to $4.5 billion without any limits on the type of borrowings and is scheduled to expire in June 2022.\n286 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 16. Contingencies, Commitments and Guarantees\n16. Contingencies, Commitments and Guarantees\nIn the normal course of business, various contingent liabilities and commitments are entered into by AIG and our subsidiaries. In addition, AIG Parent guarantees various obligations of certain subsidiaries.\nAlthough AIG cannot currently quantify its ultimate liability for unresolved litigation and investigation matters, including those referred to below, it is possible that such liability could have a material adverse effect on AIG’s consolidated financial condition or its consolidated results of operations or consolidated cash flows for an individual reporting period.\nLegal Contingencies\nOverview. In the normal course of business, AIG and our subsidiaries are, like others in the insurance and financial services industries in general, subject to regulatory and government investigations and actions, and litigation and other forms of dispute resolution in a large number of proceedings pending in various domestic and foreign jurisdictions. Certain of these matters involve potentially significant risk of loss due to potential for significant jury awards and settlements, punitive damages or other penalties. Many of these matters are also highly complex and seek recovery on behalf of a class or similarly large number of plaintiffs. It is therefore inherently difficult to predict the size or scope of potential future losses arising from these matters. In our insurance and reinsurance operations, litigation and arbitration concerning the scope of coverage under insurance and reinsurance contracts, and litigation and arbitration in which our subsidiaries defend or indemnify their insureds under insurance contracts, are generally considered in the establishment of our loss reserves. Separate and apart from the foregoing matters involving insurance and reinsurance coverage, AIG, our subsidiaries and their respective officers and directors are subject to a variety of additional types of legal proceedings brought by holders of AIG securities, customers, employees and others, alleging, among other things, breach of contractual or fiduciary duties, bad faith and violations of federal and state statutes and regulations. With respect to these other categories of matters not arising out of claims for insurance or reinsurance coverage, we establish reserves for loss contingencies when it is probable that a loss will be incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. In many instances, we are unable to determine whether a loss is probable or to reasonably estimate the amount of such a loss and, therefore, the potential future losses arising from legal proceedings may exceed the amount of liabilities that we have recorded in our financial statements covering these matters. While such potential future charges could be material, based on information currently known to management, management does not believe, other than may be discussed below, that any such charges are likely to have a material adverse effect on our financial position or results of operation.\nAdditionally, from time to time, various regulatory and governmental agencies review the transactions and practices of AIG and our subsidiaries in connection with industry-wide and other inquiries into, among other matters, the business practices of current and former operating insurance subsidiaries. We have cooperated, and will continue to cooperate, in producing documents and other information in response to such requests.\nTax Litigation.\nWe are party to pending tax litigation before the Southern District of New York. For additional information see Note 23 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.\nCommitments\nWe lease office space and equipment in various locations across jurisdictions in which the Company operates. Rent expense was $283 million, $269 million and $331 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.\nThe following table presents the future minimum lease payments under operating leases at December 31, 2018:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 287\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 16. Contingencies, Commitments and Guarantees\nOther Commitments\nIn the normal course of business, we enter into commitments to invest in limited partnerships, private equity funds and hedge funds and to purchase and develop real estate in the U.S. and abroad. These commitments totaled $6.0 billion at December 31, 2018.\nGuarantees\nSubsidiaries\nWe have issued unconditional guarantees with respect to the prompt payment, when due, of all present and future payment obligations and liabilities of AIGFP and of AIG Markets arising from transactions entered into by AIG Markets.\nIn connection with AIGFP’s business activities, AIGFP has issued, in a limited number of transactions, standby letters of credit or similar facilities to equity investors of structured leasing transactions in an amount equal to the termination value owing to the equity investor by the lessee in the event of a lessee default (the equity termination value). The total amount outstanding at December 31, 2018 was $85 million. In those transactions, AIGFP has agreed to pay such amount if the lessee fails to pay. The amount payable by AIGFP is, in certain cases, partially offset by amounts payable under other instruments typically equal to the present value of scheduled payments to be made by AIGFP. In the event that AIGFP is required to make a payment to the equity investor, the lessee is unconditionally obligated to reimburse AIGFP. To the extent that the equity investor is paid the equity termination value from the standby letter of credit and/or other sources, including payments by the lessee, AIGFP takes an assignment of the equity investor’s rights under the lease of the underlying property. Because the obligations of the lessee under the lease transactions are generally economically defeased, lessee bankruptcy is the most likely circumstance in which AIGFP would be required to pay without reimbursement.\nAIG Parent files a consolidated federal income tax return with certain subsidiaries and acts as an agent for the consolidated tax group when making payments to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). AIG Parent and its subsidiaries have adopted, pursuant to a written agreement, a method of allocating consolidated federal income taxes. Under an Amended and Restated Tax Payment Allocation Agreement dated June 6, 2011 between AIG Parent and one of its Bermuda-domiciled insurance subsidiaries, AIG Life of Bermuda, Ltd. (AIGB), AIG Parent has agreed to indemnify AIGB for any tax liability (including interest and penalties) resulting from adjustments made by the IRS or other appropriate authorities to taxable income, special deductions or credits in connection with investments made by AIGB in certain affiliated entities.\nAsset Dispositions\nWe are subject to financial guarantees and indemnity arrangements in connection with the completed sales of businesses pursuant to our asset disposition plan. The various arrangements may be triggered by, among other things, declines in asset values, the occurrence of specified business contingencies, the realization of contingent liabilities, developments in litigation or breaches of representations, warranties or covenants provided by us. These arrangements are typically subject to various time limitations, defined by the contract or by operation of law, such as statutes of limitation. In some cases, the maximum potential obligation is subject to contractual limitations, while in other cases such limitations are not specified or are not applicable.\nWe are unable to develop a reasonable estimate of the maximum potential payout under certain of these arrangements. Overall, we believe that it is unlikely we will have to make any material payments related to completed sales under these arrangements, and no material liabilities related to these arrangements have been recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheets.\nOther\n• For additional discussion on commitments and guarantees associated with VIEs see Note 10 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.\n• For additional disclosures about derivatives see Note 11 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.\n• For additional disclosures about guarantees of outstanding debt of AIG Life Holdings, Inc. (AIGLH), see Note 25 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.\n288 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 17. Equity\n17. Equity\nShares Outstanding\nThe following table presents a rollforward of outstanding shares:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 289\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 17. Equity\nDividends\nDividends are payable on AIG Common Stock only when, as and if declared by our Board of Directors in its discretion, from funds legally available for this purpose. In considering whether to pay a dividend on or purchase shares of AIG Common Stock, our Board of Directors considers a number of factors, including, but not limited to: the capital resources available to support our insurance operations and business strategies, AIG’s funding capacity and capital resources in comparison to internal benchmarks, expectations for capital generation, rating agency expectations for capital, regulatory standards for capital and capital distributions, and such other factors as our Board of Directors may deem relevant.\nThe following table presents declaration date, record date, payment date and dividends paid per share on AIG Common Stock:\nRepurchase of AIG Common Stock\nThe following table presents repurchases of AIG Common Stock and warrants to purchase shares of AIG Common Stock:\n* In 2017, we repurchased 185,000 warrants to purchase shares of AIG Common Stock.\nOur Board of Directors has authorized the repurchase of shares of AIG Common Stock and warrants to purchase shares of AIG Common Stock through a series of actions. On May 3, 2017, our Board of Directors authorized an increase of $2.5 billion to its previous share repurchase authorization. As of December 31, 2018, approximately $512 million remained under our share repurchase authorization. Shares may be repurchased from time to time in the open market, private purchases, through forward, derivative, accelerated repurchase or automatic repurchase transactions or otherwise (including through the purchase of warrants). Certain of our share repurchases have been and may from time to time be effected through Exchange Act Rule 10b5-1 repurchase plans.\nThe timing of any future repurchases will depend on market conditions, our business and strategic plans, financial condition, results of operations, liquidity and other factors.\n290 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 17. Equity\nAccumulated Other Comprehensive Income\nThe following table presents a rollforward of Accumulated other comprehensive income:\n* Includes net unrealized gains attributable to businesses held for sale.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 291\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 17. Equity\nThe following table presents the other comprehensive income (loss) reclassification adjustments for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016:\n292 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 17. Equity\nThe following table presents the effect of the reclassification of significant items out of Accumulated other comprehensive income on the respective line items in the Consolidated Statements of Income:\n* These Accumulated other comprehensive income components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. See Note 21 to the Consolidated Financial Statements.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 293\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 18. Earnings Per Share\n18. Earnings Per Share (EPS)\nThe basic EPS computation is based on the weighted average number of common shares outstanding, adjusted to reflect all stock dividends and stock splits. The diluted EPS computation is based on those shares used in the basic EPS computation plus shares that would have been outstanding assuming issuance of common shares for all dilutive potential common shares outstanding and adjusted to reflect all stock dividends and stock splits.\nThe following table presents the computation of basic and diluted EPS:\n(a) Shares in the diluted EPS calculation represent basic shares for 2017 and 2016 due to the net losses in those periods. The shares excluded from the calculation were 22,412,682 shares and 30,326,772 shares for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.\n(b) Dilutive shares included our share-based employee compensation plans and a weighted average portion of the warrants issued to AIG shareholders as part of AIG’s recapitalization in January 2011. The number of shares excluded from diluted shares outstanding were 19.6 million, 1.7 million and 0.2 million for the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively, because the effect of including those shares in the calculation would have been anti-dilutive.\n294 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 19. Statutory Financial Data and Restrictions\n19. Statutory Financial Data and Restrictions\nThe following table presents statutory net income (loss) and capital and surplus for our General Insurance companies and our Life and Retirement companies in accordance with statutory accounting practices:\n(a) Excludes discontinued operations and other divested businesses. Statutory capital and surplus and net income (loss) with respect to foreign operations are as of November 30.\n(b) In aggregate, the 2017 General Insurance companies and Life and Retirement companies statutory net income increased by $207 million and the 2017 General Insurance companies and Life and Retirement companies statutory capital and surplus decreased by $273 million, compared to the amounts previously reported in our Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2017, due to finalization of statutory filings.\nOur insurance subsidiaries file financial statements prepared in accordance with statutory accounting practices prescribed or permitted by domestic and foreign insurance regulatory authorities. The principal differences between statutory financial statements and financial statements prepared in accordance with U.S. GAAP for domestic companies are that statutory financial statements do not reflect DAC, some bond portfolios may be carried at amortized cost, investment impairments are determined in accordance with statutory accounting practices, assets and liabilities are presented net of reinsurance, policyholder liabilities are generally valued using more conservative assumptions and certain assets are non-admitted.\nFor domestic insurance subsidiaries, aggregate minimum required statutory capital and surplus is based on the greater of the RBC level that would trigger regulatory action or minimum requirements per state insurance regulation. Capital and surplus requirements of our foreign subsidiaries differ from those prescribed in the U.S., and can vary significantly by jurisdiction. At both December 31, 2018 and 2017, all domestic and foreign insurance subsidiaries individually exceeded the minimum required statutory capital and surplus requirements and all domestic insurance subsidiaries individually exceeded RBC minimum required levels.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 295\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 19. Statutory Financial Data and Restrictions\nAt December 31, 2018 and 2017, our domestic insurance subsidiaries used the following permitted practices that resulted in reported statutory surplus or risk-based capital that is significantly different from the statutory surplus or risk based capital that would have been reported had NAIC statutory accounting practices or the prescribed regulatory accounting practices of their respective state regulator been followed in all respects:\n• In 2015, a domestic life insurance subsidiary domiciled in Texas adopted a permitted statutory accounting practice to report derivatives used to hedge interest rate risk on product-related embedded derivatives at amortized cost instead of fair value. In 2018, the permitted practice was expanded to include additional derivative instruments utilized for the same purpose and to also include an additional domestic life insurance subsidiary domiciled in Texas. This permitted practice resulted in an increase in the statutory surplus of our subsidiaries of $438 million and $407 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n• As described in Note 13, our domestic property and casualty insurance subsidiaries domiciled in New York, Pennsylvania and Delaware discount non-tabular workers’ compensation reserves based on applicable prescribed or approved regulations, or in the case of our Delaware subsidiary, based on a permitted practice. This practice did not have a material impact on our statutory surplus, statutory net income (loss) or risk-based capital.\nThe NAIC Model Regulation “Valuation of Life Insurance Policies” (Regulation XXX) requires U.S. life insurers to establish additional statutory reserves for term life insurance policies with long-term premium guarantees and universal life policies with secondary guarantees (ULSGs). In addition, NAIC Actuarial Guideline 38 (Guideline AXXX) clarifies the application of Regulation XXX as to these guarantees, including certain ULSGs.\nDomestic life insurance subsidiaries manage the capital impact of statutory reserve requirements under Regulation XXX and Guideline AXXX through unaffiliated and affiliated reinsurance transactions. The affiliated life insurers providing reinsurance capacity for such transactions are fully licensed insurance companies and are not formed under captive insurance laws. One of these affiliated reinsurance arrangements, under which certain Regulation XXX and Guideline AXXX reserves related to new and in-force business were ceded to an affiliated U.S. life insurer, was recaptured effective December 31, 2016 and these reserves were ceded to an unaffiliated reinsurer.\nUnder the other intercompany reinsurance arrangement, certain Regulation XXX and Guideline AXXX reserves related to a closed block of in-force business are ceded to an affiliated off-shore life insurer, which is licensed as a class E insurer under Bermuda law. Bermuda law permits the off-shore life insurer to record an asset that effectively reduces the statutory reserves for the assumed reinsurance to the level that would be required under U.S. GAAP. Letters of credit are used to support the credit for reinsurance provided by the affiliated off-shore life insurer.\nFor additional information regarding these letters of credit see Note 8.\nSubsidiary Dividend Restrictions\nPayments of dividends to us by our insurance subsidiaries are subject to certain restrictions imposed by regulatory authorities. With respect to our domestic insurance subsidiaries, the payment of any dividend requires formal notice to the insurance department in which the particular insurance subsidiary is domiciled. For example, unless permitted by the Superintendent of Financial Services, property casualty companies domiciled in New York generally may not pay dividends to shareholders that, in any 12-month period, exceed the lesser of 10 percent of such company’s statutory policyholders’ surplus or 100 percent of its “adjusted net investment income,” for the previous year, as defined. Generally, less severe restrictions applicable to both property casualty and life insurance companies exist in most of the other states in which our insurance subsidiaries are domiciled. Under the laws of many states, an insurer may pay a dividend without prior approval of the insurance regulator when the amount of the dividend is below certain regulatory thresholds. Other foreign jurisdictions may restrict the ability of our foreign insurance subsidiaries to pay dividends. Various other regulatory restrictions also limit cash loans and advances to us by our subsidiaries.\nLargely as a result of these restrictions, approximately $41.6 billion of the statutory capital and surplus of our consolidated insurance subsidiaries were restricted from transfer to AIG Parent without prior approval of state insurance regulators at December 31, 2018.\nTo our knowledge, no AIG insurance company is currently on any regulatory or similar “watch list” with regard to solvency.\n296 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 19. Statutory Financial Data and Restrictions\nParent Company Dividend Restrictions\nAt December 31, 2018, our ability to pay dividends is not subject to any significant contractual restrictions, but remains subject to regulatory restrictions.\nFor additional information about our ability to pay dividends to our shareholders see Note 17 herein.\n20. Share-Based Compensation Plans\nThe following table presents our total share-based compensation expense:\n(a) We recognized $48 million, $141 million and $105 million for immediately vested stock-settled awards issued to retirement eligible employees in 2018, 2017 and 2016, on their respective grant dates. It is our policy to reverse compensation expense for forfeited awards when they occur.\n(b) We also recognized $9 million of excess tax benefits due to share settlements occurring in 2018.\nEmployee Plans\nThe Company sponsors several stock compensation programs under the AIG Long Term Incentive Plan and its predecessor plan, the AIG 2013 Long Term Incentive Plan (each as applicable, the LTIP), which are governed by the AIG 2013 Omnibus Incentive Plan (Omnibus Plan). Our share-settled awards are settled with previously acquired shares held in AIG’s treasury.\nAIG 2013 Omnibus Incentive Plan\nThe Omnibus Plan, which replaced the AIG 2010 Stock Incentive Plan (2010 Plan), was adopted at the 2013 Annual Meeting of Shareholders and provides for the grants of share-based awards to our employees and non-employee directors. The total number of shares that may be granted under the Omnibus Plan (the reserve) is the sum of 1) 45 million shares of AIG Common Stock, plus 2) the number of authorized shares that remained available for issuance under the 2010 Plan when the Omnibus Plan became effective, plus 3) the number of shares of AIG Common Stock relating to outstanding awards under the 2010 Plan at the time the Omnibus Plan became effective that subsequently are forfeited, expired, terminated or otherwise lapse or are settled in cash. Each share-based unit granted under the Omnibus Plan reduces the number of shares available for future grants by one share. However, shares with respect to awards that are forfeited, expired or settled for cash, and shares withheld for taxes on awards (other than options and stock appreciation rights awards) are returned to the reserve.\nDuring 2018, performance share units (PSUs), restricted stock units (RSUs), stock options and deferred stock units (DSUs) (collectively, units) were granted under the Omnibus Plan and 37,211,710 shares are available for future grants as of December 31, 2018. Units are issued to employees as part of our long-term incentive program, generally in March of any given year, and are also issued for off-cycle grants, which are made from time to time during the year generally as sign-on awards to new hires or as a result of a change in employee status.\nAIG Long Term Incentive Plan\nLTI Awards\nThe LTIP provides for an annual award to certain employees, including our senior executive officers and other highly compensated employees that may be comprised of PSUs, RSUs and/or stock options.\nThe number of PSUs issued on the grant date (the target) provides the opportunity for the LTIP participant to receive shares of AIG Common Stock based on AIG achieving specified performance goals at the end of a three-year performance period. These performance goals are pre-established by AIG’s Compensation and Management Resources Committee (CMRC) for each annual grant and may differ from year to year. The actual number of PSUs earned can vary from zero to 200 percent of the target for the 2017 and 2018 awards or zero to 150 percent of the target for the 2014 through 2016 awards, depending on AIG’s performance relative to a specified peer group or against pre-established financial goals, as applicable.\nRSUs and stock options are earned based solely on continued service by the participant.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 297\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 20. Share-Based Compensation Plans\nVesting occurs on January 1 of the year immediately following the end of the three-year performance period. For awards granted prior to 2017, vesting occurs in three equal installments beginning on January 1 of the year immediately following the end of a performance period and January 1 of each of the next two years. Recipients must be employed at each vesting date to be entitled to share delivery, except upon the occurrence of an accelerated vesting event, such as an involuntary termination without cause, disability, retirement eligibility or death during the vesting period.\nLTI awards granted in 2015 and thereafter accrue dividend equivalent units (DEUs) in the form of additional PSUs and/or RSUs whenever a cash dividend is declared on shares of AIG Common Stock; the DEUs are subject to the same vesting terms and conditions as the underlying unit.\nUnit Valuation\nThe fair value of time-vesting RSUs as well as PSUs that are earned based on certain company-specific metrics was based on the closing price of AIG Common Stock on the grant date; while the fair value of PSUs that are earned based on AIG’s relative total shareholder return (TSR) was determined on the grant date using a Monte Carlo simulation.\nThe following table presents the assumptions used to estimate the fair value of PSUs that vest based on AIG’s TSR:\n(a) The dividend yield is the projected annualized AIG dividend yield estimated by Bloomberg Professional service as of the valuation date.\n(b) The expected volatility is based on the historical volatility of the stock price for the 360 most recent trading days prior to the valuation date estimated by Bloomberg Professional service.\n(c) The risk-free interest rate is the continuously compounded interest rate for the term between the valuation date and the end of the performance period that is assumed to be constant and equal to the interpolated value between the closest data points on the U.S. dollar LIBOR-swap curve as of the valuation date.\nModification of LTI awards\nDuring the fourth quarter of 2017, the Company modified the LTI awards by issuing time-vesting RSUs and canceling some performance based units. The modification applied to most recipients who participate in the 2015, 2016 and 2017 LTI awards, excluding the Company’s senior executives. The newly granted RSUs vest in installments over a period of up to three years. We incurred incremental compensation expense of $142 million as a result of these actions. We recognized $71 million in 2017, $48 million in 2018 and the remainder will be recognized through December 2020.\nThe following table summarizes outstanding share-settled LTI awards(a):\n(a) Excludes stock options and DSUs, which are discussed under Stock Options and Non-Employee Plan, respectively.\n(b) Except for the 2014 LTI and 2015 LTI awards, PSUs represent target amount granted, and does not reflect potential increases or decreases that could result from the final outcome of the performance goals for the respective awards, which is determined in the quarter after the applicable performance period ends.\n(c) Also reflects units that vest as a result of an accelerated vesting event that occurred prior to the specified vesting date.\n(d) At December 31, 2018, the total unrecognized compensation cost for outstanding RSUs and PSUs was $215 million and the weighted-average and expected period of years over which that cost is expected to be recognized are 0.96 year and 2 years.\n298 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 20. Share-Based Compensation Plans\nStock Options\nStock options were issued in 2018 as part of the 2018 LTI awards and in 2017 and 2018 to certain newly hired senior executives. The fair value of the options was estimated on the grant date using the Black-Scholes model for the time-vesting options, and a Monte Carlo simulation for the hurdle-vesting options using the assumptions noted in the following table.\nThe following weighted-average assumptions were used for stock options granted:\n(a) The dividend yield is the projected annualized AIG dividend yield estimated by Bloomberg Professional service as of the valuation date.\n(b) The expected volatility is based on the implied volatility of 24 months stock option estimated by the Bloomberg Professional service as of the valuation date.\n(c) The risk-free interest rate is the continuously compounded interest rate for the term between the valuation date and the expiration date that is assumed to be constant and equal to the interpolated value between the closet data points on the U.S. dollar LIBOR-swap curve as of the valuation date.\n(d) The contractual terms are 7 and 10 years.\nThe following table provides a rollforward of stock option activity:\nThe weighted average grant-date fair value of stock options granted during 2018 was $11.08. As of December 31, 2018, we recognized $26.4 million of expense, while $24 million was unrecognized and is expected to be amortized up to 2.75 years.\nOther RSU Grants\nWe granted 1,385,929 off-cycle time-vesting RSUs in 2018 primarily pertaining to replacement awards granted to Validus employees. We recognized $43.3 million of expense related to these RSU grants in 2018. Total unrecognized compensation cost related to these grants was $57 million and the weighted-average and expected period of years over which that cost is expected to be recognized are 1.14 years and 4.25 years at December 31, 2018.\nNon-Employee Plan\nOur non-employee directors, who serve on our Board of Directors, receive share-based compensation in the form of fully vested DSUs with delivery deferred until retirement from the Board. DSUs granted in 2018, 2017 and 2016 accrue DEUs equal to the amount of any regular quarterly dividend that would have been paid by AIG if the shares of AIG Common Stock underlying the DSUs had been outstanding. In 2018, 2017 and 2016, we granted to non-employee directors 39,092, 32,067 and 41,974 DSUs, respectively, under the 2013 Plan, and recognized expense of $2.1 million, $2.0 million and $2.4 million, respectively.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 299\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\n21. Employee Benefits\nPension Plans\nWe offer various defined benefit plans to eligible employees.\nThe U.S. AIG Retirement Plan (the qualified plan) is a noncontributory defined benefit plan that is subject to the provisions of ERISA. U.S. salaried employees who are employed by a participating company on or before December 1, 2014 and who have completed 12 months of continuous service are eligible to participate in the plan. Effective April 1, 2012, the qualified plan was converted to a cash balance formula comprised of pay credits based on six percent of a plan participant’s annual compensation (subject to IRS limitations) and annual interest credits. Employees can take their vested benefits when they leave AIG as a lump sum or an annuity option after completing at least three years of service. Employees satisfying certain age and service requirements (i.e., grandfathered employees) remain covered under the average pay formula that was in effect prior to the conversion to the cash balance formula. The final average pay formula is based upon a percentage of final average compensation multiplied by years of credited service, up to 44 years. Grandfathered employees will receive the higher of the benefit under the cash balance formula or the final average pay formula at retirement. Non-U.S. defined benefit plans generally are either based on the employee’s years of credited service and compensation in the years preceding retirement or on points accumulated based on the employee’s job grade and other factors during each year of service.\nIn the U.S. we also sponsor non-qualified unfunded defined benefit plans, such as the AIG Non-Qualified Retirement Income Plan (AIG NQRIP) for certain employees, including key executives, designed to supplement pension benefits provided by the qualified plan. The AIG NQRIP provides a benefit equal to the reduction in benefits under the qualified plan as a result of federal tax limitations on compensation and benefits payable.\nPlan Freeze\nEffective January 1, 2016, the U.S. defined benefit pension plans were frozen. Consequently, these plans are closed to new participants and current participants no longer earn benefits. However, interest credits continue to accrue on the existing cash balance accounts and participants are continuing to accrue years of service for purposes of vesting and early retirement eligibility and subsidies as they continue to be employed by AIG.\nPostretirement Plans\nWe also provide postretirement medical care and life insurance benefits in the U.S. and in certain non-U.S. countries. Eligibility in the various plans generally is based upon completion of a specified period of eligible service and attaining a specified age. Overseas, benefits vary by geographic location.\nU.S. postretirement medical and life insurance benefits are based upon the employee attaining the age of 55 and having a minimum of ten years of service. Eligible employees who have medical coverage can enroll in retiree medical upon termination of employment. Medical benefits are contributory, while the life insurance benefits generally are non-contributory. Retiree medical contributions vary from none for pre-1989 retirees to actual premium payments reduced by certain subsidies for post-1992 retirees. These contributions are subject to adjustment annually. Other cost sharing features of the medical plan include deductibles, coinsurance and Medicare coordination. Effective April 1, 2012, the retiree medical employer subsidy for the AIG postretirement plan was eliminated for employees who were not grandfathered. Additionally, new employees hired after December 31, 2012 are not eligible for retiree life insurance.\n300 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nThe following table presents the funded status of the plans reconciled to the amount reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The measurement date for most of the non-U.S. defined benefit pension and postretirement plans is November 30, consistent with the fiscal year end of the sponsoring companies. For all other plans, measurement occurs as of December 31.\n* Includes non-qualified unfunded plans of which the aggregate projected benefit obligation was $250 million and $272 million for the U.S. at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, and $201 million and $211 million for the non-U.S at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nThe following table presents the accumulated benefit obligations for U.S. and non-U.S. pension benefit plans:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 301\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nDefined benefit plan obligations in which the projected benefit obligation was in excess of the related plan assets and the accumulated benefit obligation was in excess of the related plan assets were as follows:\nThe following table presents the components of net periodic benefit cost with respect to pensions and other postretirement benefits:\n* Reflects administrative fees for the U.S. pension plans.\nThe estimated net loss and prior service cost that will be amortized from Accumulated other comprehensive income into net periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year are $38 million and $2 million, respectively, for our combined defined benefit pension plans. For the defined benefit postretirement plans, the estimated amortization from Accumulated other comprehensive income for net gain and prior service credit that will be amortized into net periodic benefit cost over the next fiscal year is a $3 million credit in the aggregate.\nAs of 2016, interest cost for pension and postretirement benefits for our U.S. plans and largest non-U.S. plans is measured by applying the specific spot rates along the yield curve to the plans’ corresponding discounted cash flows that comprise the obligation (the Spot Rate Approach). This method provides a more precise measurement of interest cost by aligning the timing of the plans’ discounted cash flows to the corresponding spot rates on the yield curve. Previously, interest cost was measured utilizing a single weighted-average discount rate derived from the yield curve used to measure the benefit obligations.\nA 100 basis point increase in the discount rate or expected long-term rate of return would decrease the 2018 pension expense by approximately $5 million and $45 million, respectively, with all other items remaining the same. Conversely, a 100 basis point decrease in the discount rate or expected long-term rate of return would increase the 2018 pension expense by approximately $24 million and $45 million, respectively, with all other items remaining the same.\n302 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nAssumptions\nThe following table summarizes the weighted average assumptions used to determine the benefit obligations:\n(a) The non-U.S. plans reflect those assumptions that were most appropriate for the local economic environments of each of the subsidiaries providing such benefits.\n(b) Compensation increases are no longer applicable due to the plan freeze that became effective January 1, 2016.\nThe following table summarizes assumed health care cost trend rates for the U.S. plans:\nA one percent point change in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would have the following effect on our postretirement benefit obligations:\nOur postretirement plans provide benefits primarily in the form of defined employer contributions rather than defined employer benefits. Changes in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate have a minimal impact for U.S. plans because for post-1992 retirees, benefits are fixed dollar amounts based on service at retirement. Our non-U.S. postretirement plans are not subject to caps.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 303\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nThe following table presents the weighted average assumptions used to determine the net periodic benefit costs:\n* The non-U.S. plans reflect those assumptions that were most appropriate for the local economic environments of the subsidiaries providing such benefits.\nDiscount Rate Methodology\nThe projected benefit cash flows under the U.S. AIG Retirement Plan were discounted using the spot rates derived from the Mercer U.S. Pension Discount Yield Curve at December 31, 2018 and 2017, which resulted in a single discount rate that would produce the same liability at the respective measurement dates. The discount rates were 4.22 percent at December 31, 2018 and 3.61 percent at December 31, 2017. The methodology was consistently applied for the respective years in determining the discount rates for the other U.S. pension plans.\nIn general, the discount rates for the non-U.S. plans were developed using a similar methodology to the U.S. AIG Retirement plan, by using country-specific Mercer Yield Curves.\nThe projected benefit obligation for AIG’s Japan pension plans represents approximately 52 percent and 50 percent of the total projected benefit obligations for our non-U.S. pension plans at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The weighted average discount rate of 0.72 percent and 0.66 percent at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively, was selected by reference to the Mercer Yield Curve for Japan.\nPlan Assets\nThe investment strategy with respect to assets relating to our U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans is designed to achieve investment returns that will provide for the benefit obligations of the plans over the long term, limit the risk of short-term funding shortfalls and maintain liquidity sufficient to address cash needs. Accordingly, the asset allocation strategy is designed to maximize the investment rate of return while managing various risk factors, including, but not limited to, volatility relative to the benefit obligations, liquidity, diversification and concentration, and incorporates the risk/return profile applicable to each asset class.\nThere were no shares of AIG Common Stock included in the U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans assets at December 31, 2018 or 2017.\n304 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nU.S. Pension Plan\nThe assets of the qualified plan are monitored by the AIG U.S. Investment Committee and actively managed by the investment managers, which involves allocating the plan’s assets among approved asset classes within ranges as permitted by the strategic allocation. The long-term strategic asset allocation historically has been reviewed and revised approximately every three years. The investment strategy is focused on de-risking the Plan via regular monitoring through liability driven investing and the glide path approach, where the glide path defines the target allocation for the “Return-Seeking” portion of the portfolio (i.e., growth assets) based on the funded ratio. Under this approach, the allocation to growth assets is reduced and the allocation to liability-hedging assets is increased as the Plan’s funded ratio increases in accordance with the defined glide path.\nThe following table presents the asset allocation percentage by major asset class for the U.S. qualified plan and the target allocation for 2019 based on the plan’s funded status at December 31, 2018:\nThe expected long-term rate of return for the plan was 6.75 percent and 7.0 percent for 2018 and 2017, respectively. The expected rate of return is an aggregation of expected returns within each asset class category, weighted for the investment mix of the assets. The combination of the expected asset return and any contributions made by us are expected to maintain the plan’s ability to meet all required benefit obligations. The expected asset return for each asset class was developed based on an approach that considers key fundamental drivers of the asset class returns in addition to historical returns, current market conditions, asset volatility and the expectations for future market returns.\nNon-U.S. Pension Plans\nThe assets of the non-U.S. pension plans are held in various trusts in multiple countries and are invested primarily in equities and fixed maturity securities to maximize the long-term return on assets for a given level of risk.\nThe following table presents the asset allocation percentage by major asset class for non-U.S. pension plans and the target allocation:\nThe assets of AIG’s Japan pension plans represent approximately 59 percent and 56 percent of total non-U.S. assets at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The expected long term rate of return was 2.22 percent and 2.43 percent, for 2018 and 2017, respectively, and is evaluated by the Japanese Pension Investment Committee on a quarterly and annual basis along with various investment managers, and is revised to achieve the optimal allocation to meet targeted funding levels if necessary. In addition, the funding policy is revised in accordance with local regulation every five years.\nThe expected weighted average long-term rate of return for all our non-U.S. pension plans was 2.78 percent and 2.92 percent for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. It is an aggregation of expected returns within each asset class that was generally developed based on the building block approach that considers historical returns, current market conditions, asset volatility and the expectations for future market returns.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 305\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nAssets Measured at Fair Value\nThe following table presents information about our plan assets and indicates the level of the fair value measurement based on the observability of the inputs used. The inputs and methodology used in determining the fair value of these assets are consistent with those used to measure our assets as discussed in Note 5 herein.\n(a) Includes passive and active U.S. equity strategies.\n(b) Includes passive and active international equity strategies.\n(c) Includes investments in U.S. and non-U.S. government issued bonds, U.S. government agency or sponsored agency bonds, and investment grade corporate bonds.\n(d) Consists primarily of investments in securities or debt obligations that have a rating below investment grade.\n(e) Represents investments in collateralized loan obligations. As of December 31, 2017, the plan held additional asset-backed securities.\n(f) Comprised of private capital financing including private debt and private equity securities.\n(g) Excludes investments that are measured at fair value using the NAV per share (or its equivalent), which totaled $1,138 million and $777 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\nThe inputs or methodologies used for valuing securities are not necessarily an indication of the risk associated with investing in these securities. Based on our investment strategy, we had no significant concentrations of risks at December 31, 2018.\nThe U.S. pension plan holds a group annuity contract with U.S. Life, one of our subsidiaries, which totaled $18 million and $20 million at December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.\n306 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nChanges in Level 3 Fair Value Measurements\nThe following table presents changes in our U.S. and non-U.S. Level 3 plan assets measured at fair value:\nTransfers of Level 1 and Level 2 Assets\nOur policy is to record transfers of assets between Level 1 and Level 2 at their fair values as of the end of each reporting period, consistent with the date of the determination of fair value. Assets are transferred out of Level 1 when they are no longer transacted with sufficient frequency and volume in an active market. Conversely, assets are transferred from Level 2 to Level 1 when transaction volume and frequency are indicative of an active market. We had no material transfers between Level 1 and Level 2 during the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017.\nTransfers of Level 3 Assets\nWe record transfers of assets into or out of Level 3 at their fair values as of the end of each reporting period, consistent with the date of the determination of fair value. During the year ended December 31, 2018, we had no material transfers in or out of Level 3.\nExpected Cash Flows\nFunding for the qualified plan ranges from the minimum amount required by ERISA to the maximum amount that would be deductible for U.S. tax purposes. Contributed amounts in excess of the minimum amounts are deemed voluntary. Amounts in excess of the maximum amount would be subject to an excise tax and may not be deductible under the Internal Revenue Code. There are no minimum required cash contributions in 2018 for the AIG Retirement Plan. The non-qualified and postretirement plans’ benefit payments are deductible when paid to participants.\nOur annual pension contribution in 2019 is expected to be approximately $79 million for our U.S. and non-U.S. pension plans. This estimate is subject to change, since contribution decisions are affected by various factors including our liquidity, market performance and management’s discretion.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 307\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 21. Employee Benefits\nThe expected future benefit payments, net of participants’ contributions, with respect to the defined benefit pension plans and other postretirement benefit plans, are as follows:\nDefined Contribution Plans\nWe sponsor several defined contribution plans for U.S. employees that provide for pre-tax salary reduction contributions by employees. The most significant plan is the AIG Incentive Savings Plan, for which the matching contribution is 100 percent of the first six percent of a participant’s contributions, subject to the IRS-imposed limitations. Effective January 1, 2016, participants in the AIG Incentive Savings Plan receive an additional fully vested, non-elective, non-discretionary contribution equal to three percent of the participant’s annual base compensation for the plan year, paid each pay period regardless of whether the participant currently contributes to the plan, and subject to the IRS-imposed limitations. Our pre-tax expenses associated with these plans were $210 million, $209 million and $236 million in 2018, 2017 and 2016, respectively.\n22. Ownership\nA Schedule 13G/A filed on February 14, 2019 reports aggregate ownership of 47,237,956 shares, or approximately 5.5 percent (based on the AIG Common Stock outstanding) of AIG Common Stock as of December 31, 2018, by Capital Research Global Investors, a division of Capital Research and Management Company.\nA Schedule 13G/A filed on February 11, 2019 reports aggregate ownership of 67,664,554 shares, or approximately 7.8 percent (based on the AIG Common Stock outstanding) of AIG Common Stock as of December 31, 2018, by The Vanguard Group, Inc. and various subsidiaries thereof.\nA Schedule 13G/A filed on February 11, 2019 reports aggregate ownership of 64,768,700 shares, or approximately 7.5 percent (based on the AIG Common Stock outstanding) of AIG Common Stock as of December 31, 2018, by Blackrock, Inc. and various subsidiaries thereof.\nThe calculation of ownership interest for purposes of the AIG Tax Asset Protection Plan and Article 13 of our Restated Certificate of Incorporation is different than beneficial ownership for Schedule 13G.\n23. Income Taxes\nU.S. Tax Reform Overview\nOn December 22, 2017, the U.S. enacted Public Law 115-97, known informally as the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the Tax Act). The Tax Act reduced the statutory rate of U.S. federal corporate income tax to 21 percent and enacted numerous other changes impacting AIG and the insurance industry.\n308 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nDuring December 2017, the SEC staff issued Staff Accounting Bulletin 118 (SAB 118), which provided guidance on accounting for the tax effects of the Tax Act. SAB 118 addressed situations where accounting for certain income tax effects of the Tax Act under ASC 740 may be incomplete upon issuance of an entity’s financial statements and provides a one-year measurement period from the enactment date to complete the accounting under ASC 740. In accordance with SAB 118, a company was required to reflect the following:\n• Income tax effects of those aspects of the Tax Act for which accounting under ASC 740 is complete\n• Provisional estimate of income tax effects of the Tax Act to the extent accounting is incomplete but a reasonable estimate is determinable\n• If a provisional estimate cannot be determined, ASC 740 should still be applied on the basis of tax law provisions that were in effect immediately before the enactment of the Tax Act.\nAt December 31, 2017, we originally recorded a provisional estimate of income tax effects of the Tax Act of $6.7 billion, including a tax charge of $6.7 billion attributable to the reduction in the U.S. corporate income tax rate and tax benefit of $38 million related to the deemed repatriation tax. Our provisional estimate of $6.7 billion was based in part on a reasonable estimate of the effects of the statutory income tax rate reduction on existing deferred tax balances and of certain provisions of the Tax Act. We filed our 2017 consolidated U.S. income tax return and have completed our review of the primary impact of the Tax Act provisions on our deferred taxes. As a result, we consider the accounting for the effects of the rate change on deferred tax balances to be complete and no material measurement period changes were recorded for this item. As further guidance is issued by the U.S. tax authority, any resulting changes in our estimates will be treated in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance.\nThe Tax Act includes provisions for Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) under which taxes on foreign income are imposed on the excess of a deemed return on tangible assets of certain foreign subsidiaries and for Base Erosion and Anti-Abuse Tax (BEAT) under which taxes are imposed on certain base eroding payments to affiliated foreign companies. There are substantial uncertainties in the interpretation of BEAT and GILTI and while certain formal guidance was issued by the U.S. tax authority, there are still aspects of the Tax Act that remain unclear and additional guidance is expected in 2019. Such guidance may result in changes to the interpretations and assumptions we made and actions we may take, which may impact amounts recorded with respect to international provisions of the Tax Act, possibly materially. Consistent with accounting guidance, we treat BEAT as a period tax charge in the period the tax is incurred and have made an accounting policy election to treat GILTI taxes in a similar manner.\nTax effects for which a reasonable estimate can be determined\nDeemed Repatriation Tax\nThe Tax Act requires companies to pay a one-time transition tax, net of tax credits, related to applicable foreign taxes paid, on previously untaxed current and accumulated earnings and profits of certain of our foreign subsidiaries. We were able to reasonably estimate the deemed repatriation tax and originally recorded a provisional estimated tax benefit of $38 million at December 31, 2017. We have completed our review of post-1986 earnings and profits of our foreign affiliates. Incorporating additional IRS guidance issued with respect to the deemed repatriation tax, as well as the relevant basis adjustments, we recognized a measurement period tax charge of $62 million. The effect of the deemed repatriation tax, which has been determined to be complete, resulted in a liability of $24 million.\nOther Provisions\nThe Tax Act modified computations of insurance reserves for both life and general insurance companies. For life insurance companies, tax reserves are now computed with reference to NAIC reserves. For general insurance companies, the Tax Act extends the discount period for certain long-tail lines of business from 10 years to 24 years and increases the discount rate, replacing the applicable federal rate for a higher-yield corporate bond rate, and eliminates the election allowing companies to use their historical loss payment patterns for loss reserve discounting. Adjustments related to the differences in insurance reserves balances computed under the old tax law versus the Tax Act have to be taken into income over eight years by both life and general insurance companies. Accordingly, these changes give rise to new deferred tax liabilities. At December 31, 2017, we recorded a provisional estimate of $1.9 billion with respect to such deferred tax liabilities. This increase in deferred tax liabilities was offset by an increase in the deferred tax asset related to insurance reserves as a result of applying the new provisions of the Tax Act.\nAs of December 31, 2018, we have completed our review of the tax reserve computations for both life and general insurance companies, and recorded offsetting decreases of $1.4 billion to both our deferred tax liabilities and deferred tax assets.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 309\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nProvisions Impacting Projections of Taxable Income and Valuation Allowance Considerations\nDuring 2018, we completed our review of the impact of the Tax Act on our forecasts of taxable income, made certain assumptions related to interpretation of relevant new rules, and incorporated guidance issued by the U.S. tax authority. While the prescribed SAB 118 measurement period has ended, there are still certain aspects of the Tax Act that remain unclear, including the complex interplay of the new tax rules with the rules governing the utilization of our tax attributes, and formal guidance from the U.S. tax authority is still pending. We will continue to review the impact of any additional guidance issued by the U.S. tax authority on our valuation allowance analysis in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance. Accordingly, as of December 31, 2018, we consider the determination of the need for a valuation allowance related to the Tax Act to be complete based on our analysis of existing tax law and relevant tax guidance, and no measurement period adjustment was recorded.\nTax effects for which no estimate can be determined\nAt December 31, 2017, our accounting for the following elements of the Tax Act was incomplete and we continued accounting for them in accordance with ASC 740 on the basis of the tax laws in effect before enactment of the Tax Act.\nThe Tax Act may affect the results in certain investments and partnerships in which we are a non-controlling interest owner. At December 31, 2017, the information needed to determine a provisional estimate was not available (such as for interest deduction limitations in those entities and the changed definition of a U.S. Shareholder), and accordingly, no provisional estimates were recorded. We have since completed our review of these investments and partnerships. We consider the accounting for this item to be complete and no measurement period change was recorded.\nAt December 31, 2017, due to minimal formal guidance issued by state and local jurisdictions, provisional estimates were not recorded for the impact of any state and local corporate income tax implications of the Tax Act. Guidance from state and local jurisdictions has varied and most have not formally passed law specific to the treatment of the Tax Act. While we have not identified any material impact at this point in time, we continue to review any guidance issued by those states that have passed tax legislation related to the Tax Act and continue to work through the state and local corporate income tax implications of the Tax Act. We expect further guidance throughout 2019, and the impact, if any, will be recorded when the related guidance is issued. We consider the accounting for this item to be complete and no measurement period adjustment was recorded.\nReclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income\nIn February 2018, the FASB issued an accounting standard that allows the optional reclassification of stranded tax effects within Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income (AOCI) that arise due to the enactment of the Tax Act to retained earnings. We elected to early adopt the standard for the three-month period ended March 31, 2018. As a result of adopting this standard, we reclassified $248 million from AOCI to retained earnings. The amount reclassified includes stranded effects related to the change in the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate on the gross temporary differences and related valuation allowances.\nWe use an item-by-item approach to release the stranded or disproportionate income tax effects in AOCI related to our available-for-sale securities. Under this approach, a portion of the disproportionate tax effects is assigned to each individual security lot at the date the amount becomes lodged. When the individual securities are sold, mature, or are otherwise impaired on an other-than-temporary basis, the assigned portion of the disproportionate tax effect is reclassified from AOCI to income from continuing operations.\nU.S. Tax Reform - SAB 118 Measurement Period Completion\nAs of December 31, 2018, we have completed our accounting for the tax effects of the Tax Act. Although the prescribed measurement period has ended, there are aspects of the Tax Act that remain unclear and additional guidance from the U.S. tax authority is pending. As further guidance is issued by the U.S. tax authority, any resulting changes in our estimates will be treated in accordance with the relevant accounting guidance.\nEFFECTIVE TAX RATE\nThe following table presents income (loss) from continuing operations before income tax expense (benefit) by U.S. and foreign location in which such pre-tax income (loss) was earned or incurred:\n310 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nThe following table presents the income tax expense (benefit) attributable to pre-tax income (loss) from continuing operations:\nOur actual income tax (benefit) expense differs from the statutory U.S. federal amount computed by applying the federal income tax rate due to the following:\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 311\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nFor the year ended December 31, 2018, the effective tax rate on income from continuing operations was 59.9 percent. The effective tax rate on income from continuing operations differs from the statutory tax rate of 21 percent primarily due to a $62 million measurement period adjustment related to the deemed repatriation tax, $48 million net charge primarily related to the accrual of IRS interest (including interest related to uncertain tax positions), $44 million associated with the effect of foreign operations, $29 million of non-deductible transfer pricing charges, $21 million of additional U.S. taxes imposed on income of our foreign subsidiaries under international provisions of the Tax Act, and $21 million of valuation allowance activity related to certain foreign subsidiaries and state jurisdictions, partially offset by tax benefits of $75 million associated with tax exempt income, and $72 million of reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive income to income from continuing operations related to the disposal of available for sale securities. Effect of foreign operations is primarily related to income and losses in our foreign operations taxed at statutory tax rates different than 21 percent and foreign income subject to U.S. taxation.\nFor the year ended December 31, 2017, the effective tax rate on income from continuing operations was not meaningful. The effective tax rate differs from the 2017 statutory tax rate of 35 percent primarily due to tax charges of $6.7 billion associated with the enactment of the Tax Act discussed above, $660 million of tax charges and related interest associated with increases in uncertain tax positions primarily related to cross border financing transactions and other open tax issues, $69 million associated with the effect of foreign operations, and $35 million of non-deductible transfer pricing charges, partially offset by tax benefits of $201 million of tax exempt income, $184 million of reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive income to income from continuing operations related to the disposal of available for sale securities, and $40 million of excess tax deductions related to share based compensation payments recorded through the income statement in accordance with relevant accounting literature. Effect of foreign operations is primarily related to losses incurred in our European operations taxed at a statutory tax rate lower than 35 percent and other foreign taxes.\nFor the year ended December 31, 2016, the effective tax rate on loss from continuing operations was not meaningful. The effective tax rate on loss from continuing operations differs from the statutory tax rate of 35 percent primarily due to tax charges of $234 million associated with effect of foreign operations, $216 million of tax charges and related interest associated with increases in uncertain tax positions related to cross border financing transactions, $118 million related to disposition of subsidiaries, $102 million related to non-deductible transfer pricing charges, and $83 million related to increases in the deferred tax asset valuation allowances associated with U.S. federal and certain foreign jurisdictions, partially offset by tax benefits of $253 million of tax exempt income, $164 million associated with a portion of the U.S. Life Insurance companies capital loss carryforwards previously treated as expired that was restored and utilized, $116 million related to the impact of an agreement reached with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) related to certain tax issues under audit, and $132 million of reclassifications from accumulated other comprehensive income to income from continuing operations related to the disposal of available for sale securities. Effect of foreign operations is primarily related to foreign exchange losses incurred by our foreign subsidiaries related to the weakening of the British pound following the Brexit vote taxed at a statutory tax rate lower than 35 percent.\nAs a result of the Tax Act, the majority of accumulated foreign earnings that were previously untaxed were subject to a one-time deemed repatriation tax. Going forward, certain foreign earnings of our foreign affiliates will be exempt from U.S. tax upon repatriation. Notwithstanding the changes, U.S. tax on foreign exchange gain or loss and certain non-U.S. withholding taxes will continue to be applicable upon future repatriations of foreign earnings.\nFor the year ended December 31, 2018, we consider our foreign earnings with respect to certain operations in Canada, South Africa, the Far East, Latin America, Bermuda as well as the European, Asia Pacific and Middle East regions to be indefinitely reinvested. These earnings relate to ongoing operations and have been reinvested in active business operations. While, following the enactment of the Tax Act, distributions from foreign affiliates are, generally, not subject to U.S. income tax, such distributions may be subject to non-U.S. withholding taxes. A deferred tax liability of approximately $100 million to $150 million related to such withholding taxes has not been recorded for those foreign subsidiaries whose earnings are considered to be indefinitely reinvested. Deferred taxes, if necessary, have been provided on earnings of non-U.S. affiliates whose earnings are not indefinitely reinvested.\n312 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nThe following table presents the components of the net deferred tax assets (liabilities):\nThe following table presents our U.S. consolidated income tax group tax losses and credits carryforwards as of December 31, 2018.\n* Includes other carryforwards, i.e. general business credits of $30 million and refundable Alternative Minimum Tax Credits of $39 million on a U.S. GAAP basis.\nWe have U.S. federal consolidated net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards of approximately $10.2 billion. The carryforward periods for our foreign tax credits begin to expire in 2019. As detailed in the Assessment of Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowance section of this footnote, we determined that it is more likely than not that our U.S. federal consolidated tax attribute carryforwards will be realized prior to their expiration.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 313\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nAssessment of Deferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowance\nThe evaluation of the recoverability of our deferred tax asset and the need for a valuation allowance requires us to weigh all positive and negative evidence to reach a conclusion that it is more likely than not that all or some portion of the deferred tax asset will not be realized. The weight given to the evidence is commensurate with the extent to which it can be objectively verified. The more negative evidence that exists, the more positive evidence is necessary and the more difficult it is to support a conclusion that a valuation allowance is not needed.\nOur framework for assessing the recoverability of the deferred tax asset requires us to consider all available evidence, including:\n• the nature, frequency, and amount of cumulative financial reporting income and losses in recent years;\n• the sustainability of recent operating profitability of our subsidiaries;\n• the predictability of future operating profitability of the character necessary to realize the net deferred tax asset;\n• the carryforward period for the net operating loss, capital loss and foreign tax credit carryforwards, including the effect of reversing taxable temporary differences; and\n• prudent and feasible actions and tax planning strategies that would be implemented, if necessary, to protect against the loss of the deferred tax asset.\nIn performing our assessment of the recoverability of the deferred tax asset under this framework, we consider tax laws governing the utilization of the net operating loss, capital loss and foreign tax credit carryforwards in each applicable jurisdiction. Under U.S. tax law, a company generally must use its net operating loss carryforwards before it can use its foreign tax credit carryforwards, even though the carryforward period for the foreign tax credit is shorter than for the net operating loss. Our U.S. federal consolidated income tax group includes both life companies and non-life companies. While the U.S. taxable income of our non-life companies can be offset by our net operating loss carryforwards, only a portion (no more than 35 percent) of the U.S. taxable income of our life companies can be offset by those net operating loss carryforwards. The remaining tax liability of our life companies can be offset by the foreign tax credit carryforwards. Accordingly, we utilize both the net operating loss and foreign tax credit carryforwards concurrently which enables us to realize our tax attributes prior to expiration. As of December 31, 2018, based on all available evidence, it is more likely than not that the U.S. net operating loss and foreign tax credit carryforwards will be utilized prior to expiration and, thus, no valuation allowance has been established.\nEstimates of future taxable income, including income generated from prudent and feasible actions and tax planning strategies and any changes to interpretations and assumptions related to the impact of the Tax Act could change in the near term, perhaps materially, which may require us to consider any potential impact to our assessment of the recoverability of the deferred tax asset. Such potential impact could be material to our consolidated financial condition or results of operations for an individual reporting period.\nFor the year ended December 31, 2018, recent changes in market conditions, including rising interest rates, impacted the unrealized tax gains and losses in the U.S. Life Insurance Companies’ available for sale securities portfolio, resulting in a deferred tax asset related to net unrealized tax capital losses. The deferred tax asset relates to the unrealized losses for which the carryforward period has not yet begun, and as such, when assessing its recoverability, we consider our ability and intent to hold the underlying securities to recovery. As of December 31, 2018, based on all available evidence, we concluded that a valuation allowance should be established on a portion of the deferred tax asset related to unrealized losses that are not more-likely-than-not to be realized. For the year ended December 31, 2018, we established $290 million of valuation allowance associated with the unrealized tax losses in the U.S. Life Insurance Companies’ available for sale securities portfolio, all of which was allocated to other comprehensive income.\nFor the year ended December 31, 2018, recent changes in market conditions, including rising interest rates, impacted the unrealized tax gains and losses in the U.S. Non-Life Companies’ available for sale securities portfolio, resulting in a decrease to the deferred tax liability related to net unrealized tax capital gains. As of December 31, 2018, we continue to be in an overall unrealized tax gain position with respect to the U.S. Non-Life Companies’ available for sale securities portfolio and thus concluded no valuation allowance is necessary in the U.S. Non-Life Companies’ available for sale securities portfolio.\nFor the year ended December 31, 2018, we recognized a net increase of $21 million in our deferred tax asset valuation allowance associated with certain foreign subsidiaries and state jurisdictions, primarily attributable to current year activity.\n314 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nThe following table presents the net deferred tax assets (liabilities) at December 31, 2018 and 2017 on a U.S. GAAP basis:\nDeferred Tax Asset Valuation Allowance of U.S. Consolidated FEDERAL Income Tax Group\nAt December 31, 2018 and 2017, our U.S. consolidated income tax group had net deferred tax assets after valuation allowance of $14.6 billion and $13.4 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2018 and 2017, our U.S. consolidated income tax group had valuation allowances of $405 million and $86 million, respectively.\nDeferred Tax ASSET - Foreign, State and Local\nAt December 31, 2018 and 2017, we had net deferred tax assets (liabilities) of $488 million and $366 million, respectively, related to foreign subsidiaries, state and local tax jurisdictions, and certain domestic subsidiaries that file separate tax returns.\nAt December 31, 2018 and 2017, we had deferred tax asset valuation allowances of $1.4 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively, related to foreign subsidiaries, state and local tax jurisdictions, and certain domestic subsidiaries that file separate tax returns. We maintained these valuation allowances following our conclusion that we could not demonstrate that it was more likely than not that the related deferred tax assets will be realized. This was primarily due to factors such as cumulative losses in recent years and the inability to demonstrate profits within the specific jurisdictions over the relevant carryforward periods.\nTax Examinations and Litigation\nWe file a consolidated U.S. federal income tax return with our eligible U.S. subsidiaries. Income earned by subsidiaries operating outside the U.S. is taxed, and income tax expense is recorded, based on applicable U.S. and foreign law.\nThe statute of limitations for all tax years prior to 2000 has expired for our consolidated federal income tax return. We are currently under examination for the tax years 2000 through 2013.\nOn March 20, 2008, we received a Statutory Notice of Deficiency (Notice) from the IRS for years 1997 to 1999. The Notice asserted that we owe additional taxes and penalties for these years primarily due to the disallowance of foreign tax credits associated with cross-border financing transactions. The transactions that are the subject of the Notice extend beyond the period covered by the Notice, and the IRS has administratively challenged the later periods. The IRS has also administratively challenged other cross-border transactions in later years. We have paid the assessed tax plus interest and penalties for 1997 to 1999. On February 26, 2009, we filed a complaint in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York (Southern District) seeking a refund of approximately $306 million in taxes, interest and penalties paid with respect to the 1997 taxable year. We allege that the IRS improperly disallowed foreign tax credits and that our taxable income should be reduced as a result of the 2005 restatement of our consolidated financial statements.\nWe also filed an administrative refund claim on September 9, 2010 for our 1998 and 1999 tax years.\nOn August 1, 2012, we filed a motion for partial summary judgment related to the disallowance of foreign tax credits associated with cross border financing transactions in the Southern District of New York. The Southern District of New York denied our summary judgment motion and upon AIG’s appeal, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit (the Second Circuit) affirmed the denial. AIG’s petition for certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court from the decision of the Second Circuit was denied on March 7, 2016. As a result, the case has been remanded back to the Southern District of New York for a jury trial.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 315\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 23. Income Taxes\nIn January 2018, the parties reached non-binding agreements in principle on issues presented in the dispute and are currently reviewing the computations reflecting the settlement terms. The resolution is not final and is subject to various reviews. The litigation has been stayed pending the outcome of the review process. We can provide no assurance regarding the outcome of any such litigation or whether binding compromised settlements with the parties will ultimately be reached. We currently believe that we have adequate reserves for the potential liabilities that may result from these matters.\nAccounting For Uncertainty in Income Taxes\nThe following table presents a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of the total amounts of gross unrecognized tax benefits:\nAt December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, our unrecognized tax benefits, excluding interest and penalties, were $4.7 billion, $4.7 billion and $4.5 billion, respectively. The activity for the year ended December 31, 2018 is not material. The activity for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, includes increases for amounts associated with cross border financing transactions and the impact of settlement discussions with the IRS related to certain other open tax issues unrelated to the cross border financing transactions. With respect to cross border financing transactions, the increases are the result of consideration of court decisions upholding the disallowance of foreign tax credits claimed by other corporate entities not affiliated with AIG. In addition, the year ended December 31, 2017 reflects the agreement reached in the fourth quarter of 2017 by the parties in the cross border financing dispute to pursue a potential settlement.\nAt December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, our unrecognized tax benefits related to tax positions that, if recognized, would not affect the effective tax rate because they relate to such factors as the timing, rather than the permissibility, of the deduction were $38 million, $28 million and $66 million, respectively. Accordingly, at December 31, 2018, 2017 and 2016, the amounts of unrecognized tax benefits that, if recognized, would favorably affect the effective tax rate were $4.7 billion, $4.7 billion and $4.4 billion, respectively.\nInterest and penalties related to unrecognized tax benefits are recognized in income tax expense. At December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016, we had accrued liabilities of $2.2 billion, $2.0 billion, and $1.2 billion, respectively, for the payment of interest (net of the federal benefit) and penalties. For the years ended December 31, 2018, 2017, and 2016, we accrued expense of $190 million, $776 million and $26 million, respectively, for the payment of interest and penalties. The activity for the period ended December 31, 2017, is primarily related to a decrease in the expected federal benefit of interest due to the U.S. corporate tax rate reduction and to an increase in interest and penalties associated with cross border financing transactions.\nWe believe it is reasonably possible that our unrecognized tax benefits could decrease within the next 12 months by as much as $3.9 billion, principally as a result of potential resolutions or settlements of prior years’ tax items. The prior years’ tax items include unrecognized tax benefits related to the deductibility of certain expenses and matters related to cross border financing transactions.\nListed below are the tax years that remain subject to examination by major tax jurisdictions:\n316 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 24. Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited)\n24. Quarterly Financial Information (Unaudited)\nConsolidated Statements of Income (Loss)\n* For the three-month period ended December 31, 2018, our results include out of period adjustments relating to prior periods that decreased Net income attributable to AIG by $87 million, and decreased Income from continuing operations before income taxes by $132 million. The out of period adjustments for the three-month period are primarily related to decreases in Premiums and decreases in Net realized capital gains and losses. We determined that these adjustments were not material to the current quarter or to any previously reported quarterly financial statements. Had these adjustments been recorded in their appropriate periods, Net income attributable to AIG for the three-month period ended September 30, 2018 would have decreased by $40 million with no impact to the three-month periods ended June 30, 2018 and March 31, 2018, respectively.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 317\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\n25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\nThe following Condensed Consolidating Financial Statements reflect the results of AIG Life Holdings, Inc. (AIGLH), a holding company and a wholly owned subsidiary of AIG. AIG provides a full and unconditional guarantee of all outstanding debt of AIGLH.\nCondensed Consolidating Balance Sheets\n(a) At December 31, 2018, includes restricted cash of $124 million and $18 million for American International Group, Inc. (As Guarantor) and Other Subsidiaries, respectively. At December 31, 2017, includes restricted cash of $4 million and $54 million for American International Group, Inc. (As Guarantor) and Other Subsidiaries, respectively.\n(b) Includes intercompany derivative positions, which are reported at fair value before credit valuation adjustment.\n(c) Eliminated in consolidation.\n(d) At December 31, 2018, includes restricted cash of $1 million and $342 million for American International Group, Inc. (As Guarantor) and Other Subsidiaries, respectively. At December 31, 2017, includes restricted cash of $1 million and $316 million for American International Group, Inc. (As Guarantor) and Other Subsidiaries, respectively.\n318 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\nCondensed Consolidating Statements of Income (Loss)\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 319\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\n* Eliminated in consolidation.\n320 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\nCondensed Consolidating Statements of Comprehensive Income (Loss)\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 321\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\nCondensed Consolidating Statements of Cash Flows\n322 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 323\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\nSupplementary Disclosure of Condensed Consolidating Cash Flow Information\n324 AIG | 2018 Form 10-K\nITEM 8 | Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements | 25. Information Provided in Connection with Outstanding Debt\nAMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP, INC. (AS GUARANTOR) SUPPLEMENTARY DISCLOSURE OF NON-CASH ACTIVITIES:\n26. Subsequent Events\nDIVIDENDS DECLARED AND INCREASE IN SHARE REPURCHASE AUTHORIZATION\nOn February 13, 2019, our Board of Directors declared a cash dividend on AIG Common Stock of $0.32 per share, payable on March 29, 2019 to shareholders of record on March 15, 2019.\nOn February 13, 2019, our Board of Directors authorized an additional increase to its previous repurchase authorization of AIG Common Stock of $1.5 billion, resulting in an aggregate remaining authorization on such date of approximately $2.0 billion.\nAIG | 2018 Form 10-K 325\nPart II\nITEM 9'